Doll
Volume I
I. What does the company J. Mincel and S. Wokulski look like through the glass of their bottles?
At the beginning of 1878, when the political world was busy with the Peace of San Stefano, , the election of the new pope or the chances of a European war , Warsaw merchants and intelligentsia from a certain area of ​​Krakowskie Przedmieście Nevertheless, she was very interested in the future of the haberdashery store run by J. Mincel i S. Wokulski.

In the renowned eating-house, where the owners of linen and wine stores, carriage and hat manufacturers, respectable fathers of families living on their own funds, and owners of tenement houses without occupation gathered for an evening snack, there was just as much talk about the armaments of England , as in the case of the company J. Mincel and S. Wokulski.The citizens of this district, immersed in clouds of cigar smoke and leaning over bottles of dark glass, some made bets on England's victory or defeat, others on Wokulski's bankruptcy; some called Bismarck's genius , others - Wokulski's adventurer; some criticized President MacMahon's behavior , others claimed that Wokulski was a definite lunatic, if not something worse…

Mr. Deklewski, a carriage manufacturer, who owed his fortune and position to persistent work in one profession, and councilor Węgrowicz, who had been a member-guardian for twenty years one and the same Charitable Society , knew S. Wokulski the longest and most loudly predicted his ruin. - Ruin and insolvency - said Mr. Deklewski - is what a man who does not stick to one profession and is unable to respect the gifts of a gracious fortune must end in.—And councilor Węgrowicz, after each equally profound sentence of his friend, added:

— Madman! Madman!… Brawler!… Józiu, bring some more beer. Which bottle is it?

- Six o'clock, Mr. Counselor. I am at your service with lightning!... - replied Józio.

- Is it six already?... How time flies!... Madman! Madman! - muttered Councilor Węgrowicz.

For the people who ate at the councilor's eating house, for its owner, shop assistants and boys, the reasons for the disasters that were to befall S. Wokulski and his haberdashery shop were as clear as the gas flames that lit the establishment. These reasons were rooted in his restless nature, in his adventurous life, and, moreover, in the most recent actions of a man who, having a certain piece of bread in his hand and the possibility of frequenting this very decent restaurant, voluntarily gave up the restaurant, left the shop to the Divine Providence, and himself, with all the cash inherited from his wife, went to the Turkish war. make a fortune.

- Or maybe he will... Supplies for the army are a big business - Mr. Szprot, a sales agent, put in , who was a rare guest here.

"He won't do anything," replied Mr. Deklewski, "and in the meantime the devil will take the good shop. Only Jews and Germans get rich from deliveries; our people don't have the head for it."

— Or maybe Wokulski has a head?

- Madman! Madman!... - muttered the councilor. - Pass me a beer, Józiu. Which one is it?...

— The seventh bottle, Mr. Counselor. I am at your service with lightning.

— Is it seven o'clock already?… How time flies, how time flies…

The sales agent, who, due to his position, required comprehensive and exhaustive knowledge of merchants, carried his bottle and glass to the councilor's table and, drowning his sweet gaze in his tearful eyes, asked in a lowered voice:

— Excuse me, but… Why does Mr. Counselor call Wokulski a lunatic?… Perhaps I can help you with a cigar…I know Wokulski a little. He always seemed to me to be a reserved and proud man. In a merchant, reserve is a great virtue, pride a vice.But I have not noticed that Wokulski showed any tendency towards madness.

The councilor accepted the cigar without any special signs of gratitude. His ruddy face, framed by tufts of gray hair over his forehead, on his chin, and on his cheeks, resembled yarrow at that moment. set in silver.

"I call him," he replied, slowly chewing and lighting his cigar, "I call him a lunatic, because I have known him for years... Wait a minute... Fifteen... seventeen... eighteen... That was in 1860... We were eating at Hopfer's then." . Did you know Hopfer?…

— Phew…

— Well, Wokulski was a salesman at Hopfer's at the time and was already about twenty years old.

— In the wine and delicatessen trade?

— Yes. And just like today, Józio, he served me beer and Nelson roulades. …

"And from that industry he switched to the haberdashery?" the agent interjected.

- Wait a minute, sir - interrupted the councilor. - He switched, but not to haberdashery, but to the Preparatory School. and then to the Main School , do you understand?… He felt like being a scientist!…

The agent began to shake his head in a way that indicated surprise.

“That’s a real joke,” he said. “And where did he get that from?”

— No, no! Usual — relations with the Medical Academy , with the School of Fine Arts … Back then, everyone was on fire, and he didn't want to be worse than the others. During the day, he served guests at the buffet and kept accounts, and at night he studied…

— Damn, it must have been a service.

- The same as the others - replied the councilor, reluctantly waving his hand. - Only he was a beast, unpleasant when serving; at the most innocent word he would frown like a robber... Of course, we used whatever came our way on him, and he was most angry if someone called him "Mr. Counselor" ”. Once he swore at a guest so much that they both almost grabbed each other by the neck.

— Naturally, trade suffered from this.

— Not at all! Because when the news spread through Warsaw that Hopfer's clerk wanted to enter the Preparatory School, crowds began to come there for breakfast. The student body was especially swarming.

— And he went to Preparatory School too?

- He went and even passed the exam to the Main School. Well, but what do you say - the counselor continued, hitting the agent's knee - that instead of persevering with his studies to the end, he dropped out of school in less than a year...

— What was he doing?

— Well, what…Together with others, he brewed beer that we still drink today. and eventually settled down somewhere near Irkutsk. .

“What a joke, sir!” sighed the sales agent.

— It doesn't end there...In 1870 he returned to Warsaw with a small fund. He spent half a year looking for work, avoiding the spice trade, which he hates to this day, until finally, with the protection of his current manager, , Rzecki, insinuated himself into the shop of Minclowa, who happened to be a widow, and a year later he married a woman much older than him.

“It wasn’t stupid,” the agent interjected.

— Certainly. In one fell swoop he gained an existence and a workshop where he could work peacefully for the rest of his life. But he also had the Lord's cross with a woman!

— They can do it…

"How so!" the councilor said. "See, however, what happiness means. A year and a half ago, the woman ate something and died, and Wokulski, after four years of hard labor, was free as a bird, with a prosperous shop and thirty thousand roubles in cash, for which two generations of Mincels had worked."

— He's lucky.

- He had - the councilor corrected - but he did not respect it. Another in his place would have married some honest young lady and lived in luxury; for what does a shop with a reputation and in an excellent location mean today! ... But this one, a madman, dropped everything and went to do business in the war. He wanted millions or some devil.

“Maybe he will have them,” the agent said.

- Ehe! - the councilor bristled. - Give me a beer, Józiu. Do you think that in Turkey you will find a richer woman than the deceased Minclowa?...Joe!…

— I serve with lightning!… Here comes eight…

- Eight? - repeated the councilor - that can't be. Wait... Before it was six, then seven... - he mumbled, covering his face with his hand. - It could be eight. How time flies!...

Despite the gloomy predictions of people who looked at things soberly, the haberdashery store under the name of J. Mincel and S. Wokulski not only did not go bankrupt, but even did good business. The public, intrigued by the rumors of bankruptcy, visited the warehouse in increasing numbers, and from the moment Wokulski left Warsaw, Russian merchants began to come for the goods. Orders multiplied, credit abroad existed, bills of exchange were paid regularly, and the store was teeming with customers, whom the three shop assistants could barely cope with: one a miserable blond, looking as if he were dying of consumption every hour, another a brown-haired man with a philosopher's beard and the movements of a prince, and the third an elegant man who wore a mustache that was deadly to the fair sex, smelling like a chemical laboratory.

However, neither the curiosity of the public, nor the physical and spiritual qualities of the three clerks, nor even the established reputation of the shop would have saved it from failure, if it had not been managed by a forty-year-old employee of the company, Wokulski's friend and deputy, Mr. Ignacy Rzecki.

II. The rule of the old clerk
Mr. Ignacy had lived in a room at the shop for twenty-five years. During that time the shop had changed owners and floors, wardrobes and window panes, the scope of its business and shop assistants; but Mr. Rzecki's room had always remained the same. There was the same sad window, overlooking the same yard, with the same grate, on the rungs of which hung, perhaps, a quarter-century-old cobweb, and certainly a quarter-century-old curtain, once green, now faded with longing for the sun.

Under the window stood the same black table covered with cloth, also once green, now only stained. On it was a large black inkwell with a large black sandbox. , attached to the same stand - a pair of brass tallow candlesticks that no one burned any more, and steel tongs that no one used to cut off the wicks . An iron bed with a very thin mattress, above it a never-used shotgun, beneath it a guitar case resembling a child's coffin, a narrow leather-upholstered sofa, two leather-upholstered chairs, a large tin basin and a small dark cherry wardrobe formed the furniture of the room, which, because of its length and the darkness that reigned there, seemed more like a tomb than a dwelling.

Just like the room, Mr. Ignacy's habits have not changed for a quarter of a century.

In the morning he always woke up at six; for a moment he listened to the clock lying on the chair, and looked at the hands, which formed one straight line. He wanted to get up calmly, without making a fuss; but as his cold legs and slightly stiff hands were not sufficiently submissive to his will, he jumped up, suddenly jumped into the middle of the room, and, throwing his nightcap on the bed, , he ran to the stove to the large basin in which he washed himself from head to toe, neighing and snorting like an ancient horse of noble blood that remembered a race.

While drying himself with shaggy towels, he looked with pleasure at his thin calves and overgrown breasts, mumbling:

"Well, I'm gaining weight."

At the same time his old poodle Ir, with a knocked-out eye, jumped down from the couch and, shaking himself hard, probably from the remnants of sleep, scratched at the door, behind which the laborious blowing of the samovar was heard. Mr. Rzecki, still dressing in a hurry, let out the dog, said good morning to the servant, took the teapot out of the wardrobe, made a mistake in buttoning his cuffs, ran into the yard to see the weather, scalded himself with hot tea, combed his hair without looking in the mirror, and by half past six he was ready.

After checking to see if he had a tie around his neck and a watch and purse in his pockets, Mr. Ignacy would take a large key from the table and, hunched slightly, solemnly open the back door of the shop, covered with sheet iron. They would enter with a servant, light a couple of gas flames and while the servant swept the floor, Mr. Ignacy would read through his glasses the schedule of activities for the day from his notebook.

"Pay back eight hundred rubles in the bank, aha... Send three albums, a dozen wallets to Lublin... Exactly!... To Vienna, a transfer for twelve hundred guilders … In turn, pick up the transport… Prompt saddler for not sending back the suitcases… Bagatela !… Write a letter to Staś… A trifle…”

Having finished reading, he lit a few more flames and by their glow he inspected the goods in the display cases and cupboards.

"Cufflinks, pins, purses... well... Gloves, fans, ties... that's right... Walking sticks, umbrellas, travel bags ... And here - albums, briefcases … The sapphire was sold yesterday, of course!… Candlesticks, inkwells, paperweights… Porcelain… I wonder why they turned that vase upside down?… Certainly… No, not damaged… Dolls with hair, a theatre, a carousel… We have to put a carousel in the window tomorrow, because the fountain has become mundane. A trifle!… It's almost eight o'clock… I'd bet that Klejn will be the first and Mraczewski the last. Of course… He's met some governess and has already bought her a dressing-case on account and with a discount… Of course… Just as long as he doesn't start buying without a discount and without an account…”

So he purred and walked around the shop, hunched over, with his hands in his pockets, followed by his poodle. From time to time, the owner stopped and looked at some item, the dog sat on the floor and scratched the thick hair with his hind leg, and the dolls, small, medium and large, brunettes and blondes, lined up in a closet, watched them with dead eyes.

The hall door creaked and Mr. Klejn, a miserable shop assistant, appeared with a sad smile on his blue lips.

- What, I was sure you'd come first. Good morning - said Mr. Ignacy. - Paweł! Turn off the light and open the shop.

The servant came in at a heavy trot and turned off the gas. After a moment there was the grinding of bolts, the clanging of bars, and the day entered the shop, the only guest who never disappoints the merchant. Rzecki sat down at the counter under the window, Klejn stood in his usual place by the porcelain.

— The Principal He is not back yet, you have not had a letter? - asked Klejn.

— I expect it in mid-March, in a month at the latest.

— If he isn't stopped by a new war.

- Staś... Mr. Wokulski - Rzecki corrected himself - writes to me that there will be no war.

- The rates are falling, though, and I just read that the English fleet has sailed into the Dardanelles. .

- It doesn't matter, there won't be any war. Besides - sighed Mr. Ignacy - what do we care about a war in which Bonaparte doesn't take part?

— The Bonapartes have already finished their careers.

- Really? - Mr. Ignacy smiled ironically. - And for whose benefit did MacMahon and Ducrot plan the coup d'état in January? ?… Believe me, Mr. Klejn, Bonapartism that's a powerhouse!…

— It's bigger than her.

- What? - Mr. Ignacy was indignant. - Maybe a republic. with Gambetta ?… Maybe Bismarck?…

“Socialism…” whispered the miserable salesman, hiding behind the porcelain.

Mr. Ignacy planted his glasses more firmly and rose in his chair, as if wishing to overthrow at one blow the new theory that opposed his views, but his plans were thwarted by the entrance of another bearded clerk.

- Oh, my respects to Mr. Lisiecki! - he said to the newcomer. - It's a cold day, isn't it? What time is it in the city, because my watch must be fast. It's not a quarter to nine yet, is it?...

- So the concept! ... Your watch is always fast in the morning and late in the evening - replied Lisiecki tartly, wiping his frost-covered mustache.

— I bet you were on preferance yesterday. .

— I should know. What, do you think that the sight of your gallantry and your gray hair will be enough for me for the whole day?

“Well, my lord, I’d rather be a little grizzled than bald,” Mr. Ignacy said indignantly.

- Concept!... - hissed Mr. Lisiecki. - My baldness, if anyone notices it, is a sad legacy of the family, but your gray hair and grumpy nature are the fruits of old age, which... I would like to respect.

The first guest entered the shop: a woman wearing a cloak and a scarf on her head, demanding a brass spittoon… Mr. Ignacy bowed very low to her and offered her a chair, and Mr. Lisiecki disappeared behind the wardrobes and, returning after a moment, handed the requested item to the applicant with a gesture full of dignity. Then he wrote down the price of the spittoon on a piece of paper, handed it over his shoulder to Rzecki and went behind the display case with the air of a banker who had donated several thousand rubles to a charity.

The dispute over gray and baldness was resolved.

It was only around nine that Mr. Mraczewski, a handsome man in his twenties, entered, or rather rushed into the shop. blondes, with eyes like stars, lips like coral, and whiskers like poisoned daggers. He ran in, trailing a trail of scent from the threshold, and shouted:

- I give you my word of honor that it must be half past nine. I am a Letkiewicz, I am a rag, well - I am a wretch, but what can I do when my mother is ill and I have to look for a doctor. I have been to six...

— Or those to whom you give the briefcases? — asked Lisiecki.

— A dressing-case? ... No. Our doctor wouldn't even accept a pin. A worthy man ... Isn't it already half past nine, Mr. Rzecki? My watch has stopped.

“It’s almost nine …” Mr. Ignacy replied with particular emphasis.

- Only nine?... Who would have thought! And I had planned to come to the store first today, before Mr. Klejn...

“To leave before eight,” interjected Mr. Lisiecki.

Mraczewski fixed his blue eyes on him, expressing the utmost astonishment.

- How do you know?... - he replied. - Well, I give you my word of honor that this man has a prophetic sense! Today, on my word of honor... I have to be in town by seven, even if I die, even if I... have to resign...

"Start with that," Rzecki burst out, "and you'll be free by eleven o'clock." , even now, Mr. Mraczewski. You should be a count, not a merchant, and I wonder why you didn't immediately enter that profession, where one always has time, Mr. Mraczewski. Naturally!

- Well, and at his age you were running after skirts - said Lisiecki. - Why play moral games?

"I've never flown!" Rzecki shouted, banging his fist on the office.

"At least once he blurted out that he's been a failure all his life," Lisiecki muttered to Klejn, who was smiling while raising his eyebrows very high.

Another guy entered the store and demanded galoshes. Mraczewski stepped forward to meet him.

— Your galoshes, sir? Which number, if I may ask? Oh, sir, you probably don't remember! Not everyone has time to think about the size of their galoshes, that's up to us. Will you allow us to try them on?… Would you be so kind as to take a seat on the stool? .Paul! Bring a towel, take off the gentleman's galoshes and wipe his shoes…

Paul ran in with a cloth and threw himself at the newcomer’s feet.

- But, sir, I'm sorry!... - he explained. drugged guest.

"We kindly ask you," Mraczewski said quickly, "it is our duty. I think these will be good," he continued, handing over a pair of galoshes fastened together with a thread. "They are excellent, they look delicious; the esteemed gentleman has such a normal foot that it is impossible to mistake the number. The esteemed gentleman probably wants letters; what letters should they be?"

“LP,” muttered the guest, feeling that he was drowning in the swift torrent of eloquence of the polite clerk.

— Mr. Lisiecki, Mr. Klejn, please sign your letters. Will the esteemed gentleman order the old galoshes to be wrapped? Pawel! Wipe the galoshes and wrap them in tissue paper. Or perhaps the esteemed gentleman does not wish to carry an unnecessary burden? Pawel! Throw the galoshes in the box… Two rubles fifty kopecks are due…No one will change the galoshes with letters for the esteemed gentleman, and it is a sad thing to find in place of new articles, junk with holes... Two rubles, fifty kopecks to the cashier, with this note. Mr. cashier, fifty kopecks change for the esteemed gentleman...

Before the guest came to, he was dressed in galoshes, given change and led to the door amidst low bows. The customer stood for a moment in the street, staring blankly at the window, from behind which Mraczewski was giving him a sweet smile and fiery glances. Finally, he waved his hand and walked away, perhaps thinking that in another shop galoshes without letters would have cost him ten złoty. .

Mr. Ignacy turned to Lisiecki and nodded in a way that expressed admiration and satisfaction.Mraczewski noticed this movement out of the corner of his eye and, running up to Lisiecki, said in a low voice:

— Look, sir, if our old man doesn't resemble Napoleon III in profile. ? Nose... moustache... Spanish flu …

— To Napoleon when he was ill with stone ​​— replied Lisiecki.

At this joke, Mr. Ignacy grimaced with distaste.By the way, Mraczewski got his leave before seven in the evening, and a few days later he received a note in Rzecki's private catalogue:

"He was at the Huguenots in the eighth row of chairs with a certain Matylda…???”

As a consolation, he could tell himself that two of his other colleagues, as well as the collector, messengers, and even Paweł, the servant, also had notes in the same catalogue. How did Rzecki know such details about the lives of his colleagues? It was a secret he had never confided in anyone. .

At about one o'clock in the afternoon, Mr. Ignacy, having given the money to Lisiecki, whom he trusted the most despite their constant arguments, would sneak away to his little room to eat the dinner brought from the restaurant. Klejn would leave with him at the same time and return to the shop at two; then he and Rzecki would stay in the shop, while Lisiecki and Mraczewski would go for dinner. At three o'clock everyone was back in the shop.

At eight o'clock in the evening the shop closed; the shop assistants dispersed and only Rzecki remained. He made the daily account, checked the cash register, drew up a plan of activities for the next day and reminded himself: had everything been done that was due today?Each neglected matter was paid for by long sleeplessness and sad dreams about the ruin of the shop, the decisive fall of the Napoleons. and that all the hopes he had in life were just foolishness.

"Nothing will happen! We are perishing beyond salvation," he sighed, turning over on the hard bedding.

If the day went well, Mr. Ignacy was satisfied Then, before going to sleep, he read the history of the consulate and the empire. or newspaper clippings describing the Italian War of 1859 or, which happened less often, he would take his guitar out from under his bed and play the Rakoczi March on it. singing in a tenor voice of questionable quality.

Then he dreamed of vast Hungarian plains, dark blue and white lines of troops, obscured by a cloud of smoke… The next day he was in a gloomy mood and complained of a headache.

One of his more pleasant days was Sunday, when he would devise and execute plans for the window displays for the entire week.

In his view, windows not only summarized the store's resources, but also had to attract the attention of passers-by, either with the most fashionable goods, or with beautiful arrangement, or with a joke. The right window, intended for luxury haberdashery, usually contained some bronze, a porcelain vase, the entire boudoir tableware. tables, around which were placed albums, candlesticks, purses, fans, accompanied by walking sticks, umbrellas and countless small but elegant objects. In the left window again, filled with specimens of ties, gloves, galoshes and perfumes, the central place was occupied by toys, most often moving ones.

Sometimes, during these solitary occupations, a child would wake up in the old shop assistant. He would then take out and arrange all the mechanical gadgets on the table. There was a bear climbing a pole, a rooster crowing, a mouse running, a train rolling along the tracks, a circus clown galloping on a horse, carrying another clown, and several couples dancing a waltz to the sounds of indistinct music. Mr. Ignacy would wind up all these figures and set them in motion at the same time. And when the rooster began to crow, flapping its stiff wings, when dead couples danced, stumbling and stopping every now and then, when the leaden passengers of the train, traveling aimlessly, began to stare at him with amazement, and when the whole world of puppets, in the quivering light of the gas, took on some fantastic life, the old shop assistant, leaning on his elbows, would laugh quietly and mutter:

— Hee! hee! hee! where are you going, travelers?… Why are you risking your neck, acrobat?… What good are hugs for you, dancers?… The springs will unwind and you will go back to the wardrobe. Nonsense, all nonsense!… and to you, if you thought, it might seem that this is something great!…

After these and similar monologues he would quickly put away his toys and walk irritably around the empty shop, followed by his dirty dog.

"The stupidity of trade... the stupidity of politics... the stupidity of a trip to Turkey... the stupidity of a whole life, the beginning of which we do not remember and the end we do not know... Where is the truth?..."

Since he sometimes uttered such sentences loudly and publicly, he was considered crazy, and respectable ladies with marriageable daughters often said so.

— This is what bachelorhood leads a man to!

Mr. Ignacy left home rarely and for short periods of time and usually hung around the streets where his friends or officials lived. shop. Then his dark green fur coat or a tobacco coat , ash-gray trousers with a black stripe and a faded top hat, and above all his shy demeanor drew everyone's attention. Mr. Ignacy knew this and was increasingly discouraged from going for walks. He preferred to lie on his bed during holidays and spend hours looking out his barred window, behind which he could see the gray wall of the neighboring house, decorated with a single, also barred window, where sometimes there was a pot of butter or a hare's carcass hung.

But the less he went out, the more often he dreamed of some distant journey to the countryside or abroad. More and more often in his dreams he encountered green fields and dark forests, through which he would wander, recalling his younger days. Slowly a dull longing for these landscapes awoke in him, so he decided immediately after Wokulski's return to go somewhere for the whole summer.

— At least once before his death, but for a few months — he told his colleagues, who for some reason smiled at these projects.

Voluntarily cut off from nature and people, immersed in the fast-paced but narrow whirlwind of shop business, he felt an ever greater need to exchange ideas. And since he distrusted some, others would not listen to him, and Wokulski was not there, he talked to himself and — in the strictest secrecy — wrote a diary.

III. Diary of an old shop assistant
…I have been sadly thinking for several years that there are fewer and fewer good shop assistants and sensible politicians in the world, because everyone follows fashion. The humble shop assistant dresses in a new style of trousers every quarter, in a more and more strange hat, and a collar with a different turn-down.Similarly, today's politicians change their faith every quarter: once they believed in Bismarck, yesterday in Gambetta, and today in Beaconsfield. who was recently Jewish.

Apparently, they have already forgotten that in a shop you cannot dress up in fashionable collars, you can only sell them, because otherwise the guests will run out of goods and the shop will run out of guests.And politics should not be based on happy individuals, but on great dynasties. Metternich he was as famous as Bismarck, and Palmerston more famous than Beaconsfield and — who remembers them today? Meanwhile, the Bonaparte family ruled Europe under Napoleon I, then under Napoleon III, and even today, although some call it bankrupt, it influences the fate of France through its faithful servants, MacMahon and Ducrot.

You will see what Napoleon IV will do next , who is quietly learning the art of war from the English! But that is of no importance. In this little piece of writing I want to speak not of Bonaparte, but of myself, so that it may be known how good shop assistants and, although not scholars, sensible politicians were created. Such a business does not require an academy, but an example - at home and in the shop.

My father was a soldier in his youth, and in his old age a janitor in the Internal Affairs Committee. He stood straight as a rod, he had small favorites and his mustache was up; he wrapped a black scarf around his neck and wore a silver earring in his ear.

We lived in the Old Town with an aunt who washed and patched linen for officials. We had two rooms on the fourth floor, where there was little comfort but much joy, at least for me. In our little room the most impressive piece of furniture was a table, on which my father, when he returned from the office, glued envelopes; at my aunt's, the first place was occupied by a washtub. I remember that on fine days I would fly kites in the street, and in case of rain I would blow soap bubbles in the room.

On the walls of my aunt's house there were only saints; but although there were many of them, they were not as numerous as the Napoleons with whom my father decorated his room. There was one Napoleon in Egypt, another at Wagram, a third at Austerlitz, a fourth at Moscow, a fifth on the day of his coronation, a sixth at his apotheosis. When my aunt, scandalized by so many secular images, hung a brass crucifix on the wall, my father, in order not to offend Napoleon, as he said, bought a bronze bust of him and also placed it above his bed.

"You'll see, unbeliever," my aunt would often lament, "that for these tricks they'll drown you in tar."

- And! ... The emperor will not allow me to do any harm - replied the father.

My father's old friends often came to visit us: Mr. Domański, also a janitor, but from the Treasury Commission , and Mr. Raczek, who on the Danube had a greens stand. They were simple people (even Mr. Domański liked aniseed vodka a little), but they were prudent politicians. All of them, including my aunt, were very emphatic in stating that although Napoleon I had died in captivity, , the Bonaparte family will still resurface. After the first Napoleon, there will be another, and if this one ends badly, another will come, until one by one they put the world in order.

“One must always be ready for the first sound!” my father used to say.

— Because you do not know the day or the hour — added Mr. Domański.

And Mr. Raczek, holding the pipe in his mouth, spat as a sign of confirmation all the way to his aunt's room.

— Spit on me acan into the tub, I'll give it to you!… - cried the aunt.

"Maybe you'll give it to me, but I won't take it," muttered Mr. Raczek, spitting towards the chimney.

"What a bunch of rascals these grenadiers are!" the aunt said angrily.

— The ladies always liked the uhlans. I know, I know…

Later, Mr. Raczek married my aunt…

…Wanting me to be fully prepared when the hour of justice struck, my father worked on my education himself.

He taught me to read, write, glue envelopes, but above all, to drill. He drove me to drill in my early childhood, when my shirt was still peeking out from behind my back. I remember it well, because when my father commanded: "Half turn to the right!" or "Left arm forward - march!"... he would pull me in the appropriate direction by the tail of that garment.

It was the most carefully conducted study.

Often at night my father would wake me up shouting: "To arms!...", he would drill despite my aunt's insults and tears, and would end with the sentence:

- Ignaś! Always be ready, you rascal, because we do not know the day or the hour... Remember that God sent the Bonapartes to bring order to the world, and there will be no order or justice until the Emperor's testament is fulfilled.

I cannot say that my father's unwavering faith in Bonaparte and justice was shared by his two colleagues. More than once, when Mr. Raczek was troubled by pain in his leg, he would curse and groan:

- Oh! you know, old man, we've been waiting too long for a new Napoleon. My hair is starting to go grey and I'm declining more and more, and he's gone, just like he never was. Soon we'll all be old men in church, and Napoleon will probably come to sing the little hours with us.

— He will find the young.

- What young people! The best of them went into the ground before us, and the youngest are worthless. There are already among them some who have never heard of Napoleon.

“Mine heard and will remember,” my father replied, winking in my direction.

Mr. Domański became even more discouraged.

"The world is getting worse," he said, shaking his head. "Food is getting more and more expensive; they would take your whole salary for lodging, and even aniseed wine, and that's a scam. In the past you cheered yourself up with a glass, now after a glass you're as empty as if you had drunk water."Napoleon himself would never have received justice!

And to this the father replied:

— There will be justice, even if Napoleon does not exist. But Napoleon will also be found.

“I don’t believe it,” muttered Mr. Raczek.

- And if he is found, then what? - asked the father.

— We won't live to see that.

- I will live to see it - replied the father - and Ignaś will live to see it even better.

Even then my father's sentences were deeply engraved in my memory, but it was only later events that gave them a miraculous, almost prophetic character.

About 1840, my father began to feel unwell. Sometimes he would not go to the office for several days, and finally he was confined to bed.

Mr. Raczek visited him every day, and once looking at his thin hands and yellowed cheeks, he whispered:

— Hey! Man, I don't think we'll ever see Napoleon again.

To which the father calmly replied:

— I won't die there until I hear about it.

Mr. Raczek nodded, and the aunt wiped her tears, thinking that the father was talking nonsense. How could one think otherwise, when death was already knocking at the door, and the father was still looking out for Napoleon…

He was already in a very bad condition, he had even received the last sacraments, when a few days later Mr. Raczek ran in to us, strangely agitated, and standing in the middle of the room, he shouted:

— And you know, old man, that Napoleon was found. ?…

"Where?" shouted the aunt.

— Already in France.

Father jumped up, but fell back onto the pillows. He just held out his hand to me and, with a look I will never forget, whispered:

— Remember!… Remember everything…

With that he died.

In later life I saw how prophetic my father's views were. We all saw the second Napoleonic star that awakened Italy and Hungary ; and although it fell at Sedan , I do not believe in its final extinction. What do I care about Bismarck, Gambetta or Beaconsfield! Injustice will rule the world until a new Napoleon grows up.

A few months after my father's death, Mr. Raczek and Mr. Domański, together with Aunt Zuzanna, met for a council: what to do with me? Mr. Domański wanted to take me to his offices and slowly promote me to a clerk; my aunt recommended a craft, and Mr. Raczek recommended greengrocer. But when I was asked: what do I feel like doing? I replied, to the store.

- Who knows, maybe that won't be the best - observed Mr. Raczek. - And what kind of buyer would you like?

— And also on Podwale , who has a saber at the door and a Cossack at the window.

"I know," said Aunt. "He wants to go to Mincl."

- We can try - said Mr. Domański. - We all know Mincl. .

Mr. Raczek spat down the chimney as a sign of consent.

- Merciful God - moaned the aunt - that rascal will probably start spitting on me now that my brother is gone... Oh! I am an unhappy orphan!...

- Great thing! - said Mr. Raczek. - Get married, madam, and you won't be an orphan.

— And where will I find a fool enough to take me?

"Phi! maybe I'd marry the lady, because there's no one to grease my lips," muttered Mr. Raczek, stooping heavily to the ground to knock out the ash from his pipe. The aunt burst into tears, and then Mr. Domański spoke:

"Why make such a fuss? You don't have any care for the lady, he doesn't have a housekeeper; get married and take Ignaś in, and you'll even have a child. A cheap child, too, because Mincel will give him food and lodging, and you'll only give him clothes."

— Huh?… — asked Mr. Raczek, looking at his aunt.

"Well, first put the boy away for a period, and then... maybe I'll dare," the aunt replied. "I always had a feeling I'd end up badly..."

- So let's go to Mincl! - said Mr. Raczek, rising from his chair. - Only don't disappoint me! - he added, threatening his aunt with his fist.

They went out with Mr. Domański and in maybe an hour and a half they both came back very red. Mr. Raczek was barely breathing and Mr. Domański was barely able to stay on his feet, apparently because our stairs were so uncomfortable.

“What?” asked the aunt.

— They put the new Napoleon in the powder magazine! — replied Mr. Domański.

"Not to the powder magazine, but to the fortress. A-u... A-u..." added Mr. Raczek and threw his cap on the table.

— But what about the boy?

"Tomorrow he is to come to Mincl with clothes and underwear," replied Mr. Domański. "Not to the fortress of A-u..., A-u... but to Ham-ham or Cham... because I don't even know..."

"You drunkards, are crazy!" the aunt shouted, grabbing Mr. Raczek by the arm.

- Only without familiarity! - Mr. Raczek was indignant. - After the wedding there will be familiarity, now... He is to come to Mincl tomorrow with underwear and clothes... Unhappy Napoleon!...

The aunt pushed Mr. Raczek out the door, then Mr. Domański, and threw her hat behind them.

— Get out of here, you drunkards!

— Hail Napoleon! — shouted Mr. Raczek, and Mr. Domański began to sing:

Passerby, when you turn your eyes this way,
Come closer and ponder this inscription deeply…
Come closer and ponder this inscription deeply. 
His voice gradually faded away, as if sinking into a well, then fell silent on the stairs, but again reached us from the street. After a while there was some noise there, and when I looked out the window, I saw that Mr. Raczek was being led by a policeman to the town hall. .

Such events preceded my entry into the merchant profession.

I had known Mincl's shop for a long time, because my father sent me there for paper, and my aunt for soap. I always ran there with joyful curiosity, to look at the toys hanging behind the windows. As far as I remember, there was a large Cossack in the window, which jumped by itself and waved its arms, and in the doorway - a drum, a saber, and a leather horse with a real tail.

The interior of the shop looked like a large cellar, the end of which I could never see because of the darkness. I only know that for pepper, coffee, and bay leaves, one went to the left to the table, behind which stood huge cabinets from the vault to the floor, filled with drawers. Paper, ink, plates, and glasses were sold at the table on the right, where there were cabinets with glass panes, and for soap and starch, one went to the back of the shop, where one could see barrels and piles of wooden crates.

Even the vault was occupied. There were long rows of bladders filled with mustard and paint, a huge lamp with a roof that burned all day in winter, a net full of bottle corks, and finally a stuffed crocodile, perhaps a cubit and a half long .

The owner of the shop was Jan Mincel, an old man with a ruddy face and a tuft of grey hair under his chin. At all hours of the day he sat by the window in a leather armchair, dressed in a blue fustian caftan, a white apron and a matching nightcap. In front of him on the table was a large book in which he recorded his income, and just above his head hung a bundle of disciplines , intended mainly for sale.The old man took the money, gave the guests change, wrote in the book, sometimes dozed, but despite so many activities, he watched over the course of trade in the whole shop with incomprehensible attention. He also, for the amusement of passers-by, from time to time pulled the string of the Cossack jumping in the window, and finally, what I liked least, punished us for various crimes with one of a dozen disciplines.

I say: us, because there were three candidates for corporal punishment: me and the old man's two nephews, Franc and Jan Mincl.

The vigilance of the principal and his skill in using the deer leg I experienced it on the third day after entering the store.

Franc measured out raisins for a woman for ten cents. Seeing one seed fall on the counter (the old man had his eyes closed at that moment), I picked it up slightly and ate it. I was about to remove the seed that had wedged itself between my teeth when I felt something on my back like the hard touch of a red-hot iron.

"Oh, the rascal!" shouted old Mincel, and before I realized the situation he had given me a few more slaps, from the top of my head to the floor.

I curled up in a ball with pain, but from that moment on I didn't dare to put anything in my mouth in the store. Almonds, raisins, even the horns tasted like pepper to me.

Having thus arranged with me, the old man hung the discipline on the bundle, entered the raisins, and with the most good-natured expression began to pull the Cossack's string. Looking at his half-smiling face and squinting eyes, I could hardly believe that this jovial old man had such a swing in his hand. And only now did I notice that the Cossack, seen from inside the shop, seemed less amusing than from the street.

Our shop was a colonial-haberdashery-soap shop. Colonial goods were given to guests by Franc Mincel, a young man in his thirties, with a red head and a sleepy face. The latter was most often disciplined by his uncle because he smoked a pipe, came in late to the counter, sneaked out at night, and above all, weighed the goods carelessly. The younger one, Jan Mincel, who was in charge of haberdashery and, in addition to his clumsy movements, was distinguished by his gentleness, was beaten again for stealing colored paper and writing letters to girls on it.

Only August Katz, who worked in soap, did not succumb to any raw material admonitions. This miserable man was distinguished by his extraordinary punctuality. He came to work very early in the morning, cut soap and weighed starch like an automaton; he ate whatever was given to him in the darkest corner of the shop, almost ashamed of experiencing human needs.At ten o'clock in the evening he disappeared somewhere.

In this environment, eight years passed, each day being like any other day, like a drop of autumn rain to other drops of autumn rain. I would get up at five in the morning, wash myself, and sweep the shop. At six I would open the main door and the shutter. At that moment August Katz would appear from somewhere in the street, take off his coat, put on his apron, and stand silently between a barrel of grey soap and a column of bricks of yellow soap. Then old Mincel would run in through the door from the yard, muttering: Morgen! , he adjusted his nightcap, took a book from the drawer, squeezed into an armchair and tugged a few times on the laces of his boots. Only after him did Jan Mincel appear and, having kissed his uncle on the hand, stand behind his counter, where in summer he caught flies and in winter drew some figures with his finger or fist.

Franco was usually brought into the shop. He would enter with sleepy eyes, yawning, kiss his uncle indifferently on the shoulder, and scratch his head all day in a way that could mean great sleepiness or great worry. There was hardly a morning when his uncle, watching his maneuvers, would not make a face at him and ask:

— Well... where did you run, you rascal?

Meanwhile, a murmur was awakening in the street, and behind the shop windows, passers-by were passing more and more often. A maid, a lumberjack, a woman in a hood, a shoemaker's boy, a gentleman in a four-cornered cap, they were walking this way and that like figures in a moving panorama. . Carts, barrels, horse-drawn carriages were rolling down the middle of the street, back and forth... More and more people, more and more carts, until finally one big street stream was formed, from which every now and then someone would drop in to make a purchase.

— Pepper for three …

- A pound, please. coffee…

— Give me some rice…

— Half a pound of soap…

— For a penny of bay leaves…

Gradually the shop filled up mostly with servants and poorly dressed ladies. It was then that Franc Mincel grimaced the most: he opened and closed drawers, wrapped the goods in tubes from grey tissue paper, ran up the ladder, rolled it up again, doing all this with the pitiful expression of a man who is not allowed to yawn. At last such a crowd of interested people gathered that both Jan Mincel and I had to help Franek with the sale.

The old man kept writing and passing the rest, from time to time fingering his white nightcap, the blue tassel of which hung over his eye. Sometimes he tugged at his boots, and sometimes with lightning speed he took off the discipline and hoofed one of his nephews. I could rarely understand what he was on about, for his nephews were reluctant to explain to me the reasons for his irascibility.

Around eight o'clock the influx of customers decreased. Then a fat maid appeared at the back of the shop with a basket of rolls and mugs (Franc turned his back on her), and behind her — our principal's mother, a thin old woman in a yellow dress, with an enormous cap on her head, and a jug of coffee in her hands. Having placed her vessel on the table, the old woman spoke in a hoarse voice:

— Gut Morgen, meine Kinder! Der Kaffee ist schon fertig…

And she began pouring the coffee into white faience cups.

Then old Mincel approached her and kissed her hand, saying:

— Good Morning, my Mother!

For which he received a cup of coffee with three rolls.

Then came Franc Mincel, Jan Mincel, August Katz, and finally me. Each kissed the old woman's dry hand, scratched with blue veins, each said:

— Good Morning, Grossmutter!

And he received his due cup and three rolls.

And when we had hurriedly drunk our coffee, the maid took the empty basket and the smudged cups, the old woman took her jug, and both disappeared.

Outside the window, carts were still rolling by and a stream of people was flowing in both directions, from which every now and then someone would break away and enter the shop.

— Please, starch…

— Give me a tenner of almonds…

— Lucretia for a penny…

— Gray soap…

Around noon the traffic behind the grocery counter decreased, and instead more and more people started to come to the right side of the store, to Jan. Here they bought plates, glasses, irons, grinders, dolls, and sometimes large umbrellas, sapphire or crimson. The buyers, women and men, were well dressed, sat on chairs and asked to be shown a lot of items, haggling and demanding more and more.

I remember that while on the left side of the shop I was exhausted by running around and wrapping up goods, on the right side — the greatest distress was caused me by the thought: what does this or that guy really want and — will he buy something? As a result, however, here too a lot was sold; even the daily income from haberdashery was several times greater than from colonial goods and soap.

Old Mincel was also in the shop on Sundays. In the morning he prayed, and around noon he told me to come to his place for a kind of lesson.

— Sag mir — tell me: was ist das ? what is this? Das ist Schublade — this is a shovel. Look what is in this shovel. Es ist Zimmt — this is cinnamon. What do you need cinnamon for? You need cinnamon for soup, for legumes. What is cinnamon? There is such a bark from a tree. Where does such a cinnamon tree live? In India lives such a tree. Look at the globe — here lies India. Give me cinnamon for ten bucks… Oh, du Spitzbub!… If I give you ten times the discipline, you will know how much cinnamon to sell for ten cents…

In this way we went through every drawer in the shop and the history of every product. When Mincel was not tired, he would dictate to me accounting tasks, order me to add up the books or write letters on behalf of our shop.

Mincel was very tidy, he hated dust, he wiped it off the smallest objects. There were only some disciplines he never had to dust thanks to his Sunday lectures on bookkeeping. , geographer and commodity science.

Gradually, over the course of a few years, we became so accustomed to each other that old Mincel could not do without me, and I even began to regard his discipline as something that belonged to family relations.I remember that I could not contain my grief when I once broke an expensive samovar, and old Mincel, instead of taking up discipline, said:

— What have you done, Ignac?… What have you done!…

I would rather be beaten with all the disciplines than ever hear that trembling voice and see the frightened look of the principal.

We ate our weekday dinners in the shop, first the two young Mincls and August Katz, and then I and the principal. During holidays we all gathered upstairs and sat at one table.Every Christmas Eve Mincel gave us gifts, and his mother, in great secret, arranged a Christmas tree for us (and her son).Finally, on the first day of the month, we all received our salaries (I took 10 złoty). On this occasion, everyone had to prove their savings: me, Katz, two nephews, and the servants. Not saving, or rather not putting aside at least a few pennies every day, was in Mincl's eyes as much of a crime as theft. In my memory, a few assistants and a few apprentices passed through our shop, whom the principal dismissed simply because they had not saved anything. The day this was revealed was the last day of their stay. Promises, spells, kissing hands, even falling at his feet did not help. The old man did not move from his armchair. , he did not look at the petitioners , only pointing to the door he uttered one word: fort! fort!… The principle of saving money had already become a morbid eccentricity for him.

This good man had one fault, that is, he hated Napoleon. He himself never mentioned him, but at the sound of Bonaparte's name he had a sort of fit of rage; he turned blue in the face, spat, and shouted: rascal! spitzbub! highwayman!...

Having heard such hideous invective for the first time, I almost lost consciousness. I wanted to say something arrogant to the old man and run away to Mr. Raczek, who had already married my aunt. Suddenly I noticed that Jan Mincel, covering his mouth with his hand, was mumbling something and making faces at Katz. I strained my ears and—this is what Jan said:

— Good grief, old chap! Napoleon was a great man, if only for driving out the Swabian exterminators. Isn't that right, Katz?

And August Katz narrowed his eyes and continued cutting the soap.

I was dumbfounded, but at that moment I liked Jan Mincl and August Katz very much. In time I came to understand that there were two great factions in our little shop, one of which, consisting of old Mincl and his mother, was very fond of the Germans, and the other, consisting of the young Mincls and Katz, hated them. As far as I remember, I was the only one who was neutral.

In 1846 we heard news of Louis Napoleon's escape from prison. This year was important for me, because I became a shop assistant, and our principal, old Jan Mincel, ended his life for rather strange reasons.

This year, trade in our store has slowed down somewhat, mainly due to general unrest. , already because the principal swore at Louis Napoleon too often and too loudly. People began to be discouraged from us, and someone (maybe Katz?...) even broke our window one day.

Now this accident, instead of completely alienating the public, enticed them into the shop, and for a week we had a turnover as large as never before; our neighbors envied us. After a week, however, the artificial traffic weakened again, and the shop was again empty.

One evening, during the absence of the principal, which was already an unusual fact, a second stone fell into our shop. The frightened Mincls ran upstairs and looked for their uncle, Katz ran into the street to look for the perpetrator of the destruction, and suddenly two policemen appeared dragging... Please guess who?... No more, no less - only our principal, accusing him of breaking the window now, and probably also previously...

In vain did the old man deny it: not only had they seen him attempt it, but they had also found a stone on him… The poor guy also went to the town hall.

After many explanations and explanations, the matter naturally fell through; but from that moment on, the old man completely lost his temper and began to lose weight. And one day, having sat down in his armchair by the window, he never rose from it. He died, leaning his chin on a business book, and holding in his hand a string with which he had been moving a Cossack.

For several years after the death of their uncle, the nephews ran a joint shop on Podwale and only around 1850 did they divide in such a way that Franc stayed on site with the colonial goods, and Jan with the haberdashery and soap moved to Krakowskie, to the premises we currently occupy. A few years later, Jan married the beautiful Małgorzata Pfeifer, and she (may she rest in peace) having become a widow gave her hand to Staś Wokulski, who thus inherited the business run by two generations of the Mincels.

Our principal's mother lived for a long time; when I returned from abroad in 1853, I found her in the best of health. She always came down to the shop in the morning and always said:

— Gut Morgen meine Kinder! Der Kaffee ist schon fertig…

Only her voice grew fainter from year to year, until at last it was silent forever.

In my time the principal was the father and teacher of apprentices and the most watchful servant of the shop; his mother or wife were housekeepers, and all members of the family were employees. Today the principal only takes the income from the trade, usually does not know it and is most concerned that his children do not become merchants. I am not talking about Staś Wokulski, who has broader intentions, but I think in general that a merchant should sit in the shop and train people if he wants to have decent ones.

Andrassy is said to have demanded sixty million guilders for unforeseen expenses. . So Austria is arming itself, and in the meantime Staś writes to me that there will be no war. Since he has never been a braggart, he must be very much privy to politics; and in that case he is not in Bulgaria because of his love of trade.

I wonder what he'll do! I wonder!…

IV. Return
It's Sunday, a hideous March day; it's almost noon, but the streets of Warsaw are almost empty. People don't leave their homes, or they hide in doorways, or they huddle together to escape the rain and snow that's lashing them. You can barely hear the rattle of cabs, because the cabs are parked.The cab drivers, having left the box, go under the bodies of their carriages, and the horses, soaked in rain and covered with snow, look as if they wanted to hide under the shaft and cover themselves with their ears.

Despite, or perhaps because of, such an ugly time, Mr. Ignacy, sitting in his barred room, is very cheerful. The shop business is going great, the window display for next week is already arranged, and above all — Wokulski is due to return any day now.Finally, Mr. Ignacy will hand over the bills and the burden of running the store to someone, and in two months at the latest he will go on vacation. After twenty-five years of work — and what work! — he deserves this rest. He will think only of politics, he will walk, run and jump in the fields and forests, he will whistle and even sing as in his youth. If it were not for these rheumatic pains, which will disappear in the country…

So even though the sleet beats against the barred windows, even though it falls so thickly that the room is dark, Mr. Ignacy is in a spring mood. He takes his guitar from under his bed, tunes it and, taking a few chords, begins to sing a very romantic song through his nose:

Spring is waking up in all of nature
Greeted by the mournful song of nightingales;
In a green grove, above a stream,
Two beautiful roses are blooming. 
These magical sounds wake up the poodle sleeping on the couch, who begins to watch his master with his one eye. These sounds do more, because they cause a huge shadow in the yard, which stands in the barred window and tries to look into the room, which attracts Mr. Ignacy's attention.

“Yes, it must be Paul,” thinks Mr. Ignacy.

But Ir thinks otherwise, as he jumps off the couch and sniffs the door anxiously, as if he could smell a stranger.

There is a rustle in the hallway. A hand searches for the handle, and finally the door opens, and on the threshold stands someone dressed in a large fur coat speckled with snow and raindrops.

— Who is it? — asks Mr. Ignacy, his face turning red.

- Have you forgotten about me already, old man?… - the guest replies quietly and slowly.

Mr. Ignacy is getting more and more confused. He puts his glasses on his nose, which fall off, then he pulls out a coffin-shaped box from under his bed, quickly hides the guitar and puts the same box with the guitar on his bed.

Meanwhile, the guest has taken off his large fur coat and sheepskin hat, and the one-eyed Ir, having sniffed him, begins to wag his tail, fawn and fall at his feet with joyful whining.

Mr. Ignacy approaches the guest, more moved and hunched than ever.

"I think..." he says, rubbing his hands together, "I think I have the pleasure..."

Then he leads the guest to the window, blinking.

— Staś… how dear God is to me!…

He pats his bulging chest, squeezes his right and left hands, and finally, having rested his hand on his cropped head, he makes a movement with it as if he wanted to rub ointment into the area of ​​his crown.

— Ha! ha! ha! — laughs Mr. Ignacy. — Staś himself… Staś from the war!… What, you only just remembered that you have a shop and friends? — he adds, hitting him hard on the shoulder blade. — The devil take me if you don’t resemble a soldier or a sailor, but never a merchant… He hasn’t been in a shop for eight months!… What a chest… what a head…

The guest laughed too. He embraced Ignacy around the neck and kissed him warmly several times on both cheeks, which the old clerk offered to him one after another, but did not return the kiss.

"So, what's up with you, old man?" the guest asked. "You've gotten thinner, you've turned pale..."

— Yes, I'm gaining some weight.

— You've gone grey... How are you?

— Excellent. And the shop is doing well, our turnover has increased a bit. In January and February we had a bargain of twenty-five thousand rubles... Stas, my dear!... He hasn't been home for eight months... A trifle... Maybe you'll sit down?

"Of course," replied the guest, sitting down on the sofa, on which Ir soon sat down and rested his head on his lap.

Mr. Ignacy pulled up a chair.

— Would you like something to eat? I have ham and some caviar.

— Yes, indeed.

— What would you like to drink? I have a bottle of good Hungarian wine, but only one whole glass.

“I will drink from a glass,” replied the guest.

Mr. Ignacy began to walk around the room, successively opening the wardrobe, the trunk, and the table.

He took out the wine and put it away again, then spread out the ham and a few rolls on the table. His hands and eyelids were trembling, and it took him a long time to calm down enough to gather the supplies he had previously calculated for one point. Only a glass of wine restored his seriously disturbed moral equilibrium.

Meanwhile, Wokulski was eating.

"Well, what's new?" Mr. Ignacy said in a calmer tone, nudging his guest in the knee.

- I assume you mean politics - replied Wokulski. - There will be peace.

— And why is Austria arming itself?

— Is he arming himself for sixty million guilders?… He wants to take Bosnia and Herzegovina .

Ignatius's pupils dilated.

- Austria wants to take it?… - he repeated. - For what?…

- For what? - Wokulski smiled. - Because Türkiye cannot forbid her to do so.

— What about England?

— England will also receive compensation.

— At Turkey's expense?

— Of course. It is always the weak who bear the cost of conflicts between the strong.

“And justice?” exclaimed Ignatius.

—It is just that the strong multiply and grow, and the weak perish. Otherwise the world would become a home for the disabled, which would be an injustice.

Ignatius moved his chair.

- And you say that, Stasiu? ... Seriously, no kidding?

Wokulski turned a calm look at him.

"I say," he replied. "What is strange in that? Does not the same law apply to me, to you, to all of us? ... I have wept too much for myself to feel sorry for Turkey."

Mr. Ignacy lowered his eyes and fell silent. Wokulski ate.

— Well, how did it go for you? — Rzecki asked in his usual tone.

Wokulski's eyes flashed. He put down the bun and leaned against the arm of the couch.

"Do you remember," he said, "how much money I took when I left here?"

— Thirty thousand rubles, all cash.

— What do you think: how much did I bring?

- Fifty... about forty thousand... Did I guess?... - asked Rzecki, looking at him uncertainly.

Wokulski poured a glass of wine and drank it slowly.

"Two hundred and fifty thousand rubles, a large part of which is in gold," he said emphatically. "And since I ordered the purchase of banknotes, which I will sell after the conclusion of peace, I will have more than three hundred thousand rubles..."

Rzecki leaned towards him and opened his mouth.

— Don't be afraid — Wokulski continued. —I earned that penny honestly, even hard, very hard. The whole secret is that I had a wealthy partner and that I was content with four or five times less profit than the others. Therefore, my capital, which was constantly growing, was in constant motion. "Well," he added after a moment, "I was also crazy lucky... Like a player who gets the same number ten times in a row in roulette. A big game?... I bet my entire fortune almost every month, and my life every day."

"And that's the only reason you went there?" Ignacy asked.

Wokulski looked at him mockingly.

— Did you want me to become a Turkish Wallenrod?…

- To risk oneself for the sake of wealth when one has a quiet piece of bread! ... - muttered Mr. Ignacy, nodding his head and raising his eyebrows.

Wokulski trembled with anger and jumped up from the couch.

"This peaceful bread," he said, clenching his fists, "has choked and stifled me for six years!... Do you not remember how many times a day I am reminded of the two generations of the Mincls or of my wife's angelic kindness? Was there anyone, apart from you, among my distant and close acquaintances who did not torment me with a word, a gesture, or even a look? How many times has it been said about me and to me that I feed myself from my wife's apron, that I owe everything to the work of the Mincls, and nothing, nothing at all, to my own energy, although I have raised this little shop, doubled its income..."

Mincle and always Mincle!... Today let them compare me with the Mincles. I alone have earned ten times more in half a year than two generations of Mincles in half a century. To gain what I have gained between bullet, knife and typhus, a thousand Mincles would have had to sweat in their shops and nightcaps. Now I know how many Mincles I am worth, and God willing, for a similar result I would repeat my game a second time! I would rather fear bankruptcy and death than to curry favor with those who buy an umbrella from me, or fall at the feet of those who deign to buy water closets in my shop...

"Always the same!" whispered Ignatius.

Wokulski calmed down. He leaned on Ignacy's shoulder and, looking into his eyes, said gently:

— You're not angry, man?

— What? Or I don't know that the wolf won't guard the sheep... Naturally...

— How are you? — tell me.

— Exactly as much as I wrote you in the reports. Business is going well, goods have increased, and even more orders. We need one sales assistant.

— We'll take two, we'll expand the shop, it'll be great.

— A trifle!

Wokulski looked at him from the side and smiled, seeing that the old man was regaining his good humor.

— But what's the news in town? The shop must be fine as long as you're there.

— In the city…

— From the old kundmans Has anyone left? Wokulski interrupted him, walking around the room faster and faster.

— Nobody! New ones have arrived.

— A… a…

Wokulski stood as if hesitating. He poured another glass of wine and drank it in one gulp.

— And Łęcki buys from us?…

— He takes it on account more often.

- So he takes... - Here Wokulski took a breath. - How does he stand?

— It seems that he is a complete bankrupt and perhaps this year they will finally auction off his tenement house.

Wokulski leaned over the couch and started playing with Ir.

— Please... And Miss Łęcka wasn't married?

- NO.

— And it doesn't work?…

— I doubt it very much. Who would marry a young lady these days who has great demands and no dowry? She will grow old, though pretty. Naturally…

Wokulski straightened and stretched. His stern face took on a strangely sorrowful expression.

"My dear old man!" he said, taking Ignacy by the hand, "my honest old friend! You can't even imagine how happy I am to see you, and in this room, too. Do you remember how many evenings and nights I spent here... how you fed me... how you gave me the best clothes... Do you remember?..."

Rzecki looked at him carefully and thought that the wine must be good, since it had loosened Wokulski's mouth so much.

Wokulski sat down on the couch and, leaning his head against the wall, said as if to himself:

— You have no idea what I suffered, far from everyone, uncertain whether I would see anyone again, so terribly lonely. Because you see, the worst loneliness is not the one that surrounds a person, but the emptiness within him, when he brought from his homeland neither a warmer look, nor a cordial word, not even a spark of hope…

Mr. Ignacy moved in his chair with the intention of protesting.

"Let me remind you," he said, "that at first I wrote you very kind letters, yes, perhaps even too sentimental. It was only your short answers that put me off."

— Or do I have a grudge against you?…

— All the less you can have for other employees who don't know you like I do.

Wokulski woke up.

- But I don't hold a grudge against any of them. Maybe - a little - against you, for writing so little about... the city... In addition, the "Kurier" was often lost. at the post office, there were gaps in the messages, and then I was tormented by the worst premonitions.

- For what reason? After all, there was no war here - replied Mr. Ignacy with surprise.

— Oh yes!… You even had a good time. I remember, in December you had great tableaux vivants . Who was in them?…

— Well, I don't go for such nonsense.

- That's true. And that day I would have given - I think - ten thousand rubles to see them. It's even more stupid! ... Isn't that so? ...

— Probably — although a lot of it explains loneliness and boredom…

- Or maybe longing - Wokulski interrupted. - It ate up every moment I had free from work, every hour of rest. Pour me some wine, Ignacy.

He drank it, began to walk around the room again and spoke in a hushed voice:

— The first time it happened to me was during a crossing of the Danube, which lasted from evening to night. I was sailing alone and the Gypsy ferryman. Unable to talk, I looked at the surroundings. There were sandy banks, like ours. And trees similar to our willows, hills covered with hazel and clumps of pine forests. For a moment it seemed to me that I was in the country and that before nightfall I would see you again. Night fell, but at the same time the banks disappeared from my sight. I was alone on a huge streak of water, in which faint stars were reflected.

Then it occurred to me that I was so far from home, that today the only link between me and you were these stars, that at this moment no one in your country was looking at them, no one remembered me, no one!… I felt as if I was torn apart internally, and only then did I realize how deep the wound in my soul was.

“It’s true that I’ve never been interested in the stars,” whispered Mr. Ignacy.

—From that day on I succumbed to a strange disease — said Wokulski. —As long as I wrote letters, made accounts, received goods, sent out my agents, as long as I even lifted and unloaded broken-down carts or watched over a sneaking robber, I had relative peace. But when I tore myself away from business, or even when I put down my pen for a moment, I felt pain, as if — do you understand, Ignacy? — a grain of sand had fallen into my heart. There were times when I walked, ate, talked, thought consciously, gazed at the beautiful surroundings, even laughed and was cheerful, and yet I felt some dull sting, some slight anxiety, some infinitesimal fear.

This chronic, exhausting condition beyond all expression, was blown into a storm by every circumstance. A tree of familiar form, some ragged hill, the color of a cloud, the flight of a bird, even a gust of wind without any reason at all, aroused in me such mad despair that I fled from people.I looked for a place so empty that I could fall to the ground and, without anyone hearing me, howl with pain like a dog.

Sometimes, in this flight from myself, night caught up with me. Then, from behind the bushes, fallen trunks and crevices, some gray shadows would come out to meet me and sadly nod their heads with faded eyes. And all the rustling of leaves, the distant clatter of carts, the murmur of waters merged into one mournful voice that asked me: "Our passerby, oh! what has become of you?..."

Oh, what happened to me…

"I don't understand anything," interrupted Ignacy. "What madness is this?"

— What?… Longing

— For what?

Wokulski quivered.

— For what? Well… for everything… for the country…

— Why didn't you come back?

- And what would returning give me? ... Besides - I couldn't.

"You couldn't?" Ignatius repeated.

"I couldn't... and that's it! I had no reason to come back," Wokulski replied impatiently. "Die here or there, it doesn't matter... give me some wine," he concluded suddenly, holding out his hand.

Rzecki looked into his feverish face and pushed the bottle away.

“Come on,” he said, “you’re already irritated enough…”

— That's why I want to drink...

"That's why you shouldn't drink," Ignatius interrupted. "You talk too much... maybe more than you'd like," he added emphatically.

Wokulski stepped back. He thought about it and replied, shaking his head:

— You are wrong.

- I'll prove it to you in a moment - Ignacy replied in a hushed voice. - You didn't go there just to make money...

“Probably,” Wokulski said after some thought.

- Why would you need three hundred thousand rubles if you only had a thousand a year?…

- That's true.

Rzecki brought his mouth closer to his ear.

- I'll tell you that you didn't bring that money for yourself...

— Who knows, maybe you have guessed it.

— I guess more than you think…

Wokulski suddenly laughed.

"Ah, so you think so?" he cried. "I assure you, you know nothing, you old dreamer."

— I'm afraid of your sobriety, under the influence of which you talk like a madman. Do you understand me, Stasiu?…

Wokulski was still laughing.

"You are right, I am not used to drinking and the wine went to my head. But - I have already gathered my senses. I will only tell you that you are completely mistaken. And now, to save me from complete drunkenness, drink yourself - to the success of my intentions."

Ignacy poured a glass and, shaking Wokulski's hand tightly, said:

— For the success of great intentions…

— Great for me, but actually very modest.

"Let it be so," said Ignatius. "I am so old that I am more comfortable not knowing anything; I am even so old that I desire only one thing—a beautiful death. Give me your word that when the time comes, you will let me know..."

— Yes, when the time comes, you will be my matchmaker.

“I have already been there and unfortunately…” said Ignatius.

— With the widow seven years ago?

— Before fifteen .

- Same thing again - Wokulski laughed. - Always the same!

- And you are the same. For the success of your intentions... Whatever they are, I know one thing, that they must be worthy of you. And now - I am silent...

Having said this, Ignacy drank the wine and threw the glass on the ground. The glass shattered with a clatter that woke Ira.

"Let's go to the store," said Ignacy. "There are conversations after which it's good to talk about business."

He took a key from the table and they went out. Wet snow blew on them in the hallway. Rzecki opened the shop door and lit a few lamps.

- What goods! - Wokulski exclaimed. - Everything is new, I suppose?

— Almost. Do you want to see?… Here is porcelain. I draw your attention…

— Later... Give me the book.

— Income?…

— No, debtors.

Rzecki opened the desk, took out a book and pulled out an armchair. Wokulski sat down and, glancing at the list, found one name in it.

- One hundred and forty rubles - he said, reading. - Well, that's not much...

- Who is that? - asked Ignacy. - And... Łęcki...

- Miss Łęcka also has an open credit... very good - Wokulski continued, moving his face closer to the book, as if the writing in it was unclear. - A... a... The other day she took a purse... Three rubles?... that's probably too expensive...

- Not at all - Ignacy put in. - The purse is perfect, I chose it myself.

"Which ones are these from?" Wokulski asked carelessly and closed the book.

— From this display case. See what little gems these are.

— But she had to shift a lot between them… She's apparently demanding…

"She didn't flip through at all, why would she?" Ignacy replied. "She looked at that…

— This one?…

— And she wanted to take this…

— Oh, this one… — whispered Wokulski, taking the purse in his hand.

— But I advised her something else, something like this…

— You know what, it's a nice product.

— The one I chose was even prettier.

- I really like this one. You know... I'll take it, because mine is no good anymore...

"Wait, I'll find you a better one," Rzecki called.

— Whatever. Show me other goods, maybe I can use something else.

— Do you have cufflinks?… Tie, galoshes, umbrella…

- Give me an umbrella, well... and a tie. Take your pick. I'll be the only guest today, and I'll pay cash.

“A very good custom,” replied the delighted Rzecki. He quickly took a tie from the drawer and an umbrella from the window and handed them to Wokulski with a laugh. “After knocking off the discount,” he added, “as a trader, you will pay seven rubles. A delicious umbrella… A trifle…”

— Then we'll come back to you — said Wokulski.

— Aren't you going to look at the store? — asked Ignacy.

— Oh, what does that bother me…

- Don't you care about your own shop, such a beautiful shop?... - Ignacy was surprised.

— Where else, can you imagine... But I'm a little tired.

- Rightly so - replied Rzecki. - What is right is right. So let's go.

He turned off the lamps and, having let Wokulski pass, closed the shop. In the hallway they were again met by wet snow and Paweł carrying dinner.

V. The Democratization of the Gentleman and the Dreams of the Society Girl
Mr. Tomasz Łęcki with his only daughter Izabela and cousin Miss Florentyna did not live in his own tenement house, but rented a premises consisting of eight rooms on the side of Aleja Ujazdowska .He had there a drawing room with three windows, his own study, his daughter's study, a bedroom for himself, a bedroom for his daughter, a dining room, a room for Miss Florentyna and a dressing room, not to mention the kitchen and an apartment for the servants, consisting of the old butler Mikołaj, his wife, who was a cook, and a maid, Anusia.

The apartment had great advantages. It was dry, warm, spacious, and bright. It had marble stairs, gas, electric bells, and waterworks. Each room, as needed, connected with others or formed a closed whole. Finally, there was a sufficient number of furnishings, neither too little nor too much, and each was distinguished by a comfortable simplicity rather than by eye-catching ornaments. The sideboard inspired in the viewer a feeling of certainty that the silverware would not be lost from it; the bed brought to mind the safe repose of the well-deserved; the table could be weighed down, the chair could be sat on without fear of falling over, the armchair could be dreamed of.

Whoever entered here had freedom of movement; he did not have to fear that something would block his way or that he would ruin something. He did not get bored while waiting for the host, because he was surrounded by things that were worth looking at. At the same time, the sight of objects that had not been made yesterday and could serve several generations, set him in a certain tone of solemnity.

Against this serious background its inhabitants stood out clearly.

Mr. Tomasz Łęcki was a man of sixty, not tall, full-bodied, red-blooded. He wore a small white mustache and combed hair of the same color upwards. He had gray, intelligent eyes, an upright posture, he walked sharply. In the street, people made way for him - and simple people said: you must be a gentleman among gentlemen.

Indeed, Mr. Łęcki counted numerous senators in his family.His father still had millions, and he himself had a fortune when he was young. However, later on, part of the fortune was destroyed by political events. , the rest - travels around Europe and high relations.Mr. Tomasz had been to the French court before 1870, and then to the Viennese and Italian courts. Victor Emmanuel , charmed by the beauty of his daughter, honored him with his friendship and even wanted to give him the title of count. No wonder that Mr. Thomas wore crape on his hat for two months after the death of the great king.

For several years Mr. Tomasz had not left Warsaw, as he no longer had enough money to shine at the courts. On the other hand, his apartment became the center of the elegant world and remained so until the rumors spread that Mr. Tomasz had lost not only his fortune, but even Miss Izabela's dowry.

The epusers were the first to retreat , followed by ladies with ugly daughters, and Mr. Tomasz himself broke with the rest and limited his acquaintances solely to relations with his family. But when he noticed a drop in emotional temperature here, he withdrew from society altogether, and even, to the outrage of many respectable people, as the owner of a house in Warsaw, he entered the Merchant Resursa They wanted to make him the president there, but he refused.

Only his daughter visited the elderly Countess Karolowa and a few of her friends, which again gave rise to the rumor that Mr. Tomasz still had a fortune and that he had broken away from society partly out of eccentricity, partly to meet real friends and choose a husband for his daughter who would love her for herself, not for the dowry.

So again a crowd of admirers began to gather around Miss Łęcka, and on the table in her drawing room there were piles of visiting cards. However, guests were not accepted, which, however, did not cause too much indignation among them, because a third rumour spread that Łęcki was being auctioned off for the tenement house.

This time there was confusion in the society. Some claimed that Mr. Tomasz was a declared bankrupt, others were ready to swear that he had concealed his fortune in order to ensure the happiness of his only child. The candidates for marriage and their families found themselves in tormenting uncertainty. So as not to risk anything and not to lose anything, they paid homage to Miss Izabela without getting involved unnecessarily and quietly threw their cards in her house, asking God that they would not be invited before the situation became clear.

There was no talk of return visits from Mr. Tomasz. He was excused by eccentricity and sadness over Victor Emmanuel.

Meanwhile, Mr. Tomasz walked along the Aleje during the day and played whist in the evening. in resource.His countenance was always so calm, and his bearing so proud, that his daughter's admirers lost their heads altogether. The more prudent waited, but the bolder began to give her a slow glance, a quiet sigh, or a trembling squeeze of the hand, to which the young lady responded with icy and sometimes contemptuous indifference.

Miss Izabela was an unusually beautiful woman. Everything about her was original and perfect. She was more than average tall, had a very shapely figure, had lush blond hair with an ash-gray tint, a straight nose, slightly protruding lips, pearly teeth, model hands and feet. Her eyes were particularly impressive, sometimes dark and dreamy, sometimes full of sparks of amusement, sometimes light blue and cold as ice.

The play of her physiognomy was striking. When she spoke, her lips, eyebrows, nostrils, hands, her whole posture spoke, and above all her eyes, with which she seemed to want to pour her soul into the listener. When she listened, she seemed to want to drink the soul out of the narrator. Her eyes knew how to embrace, caress, cry without tears, burn and freeze. Sometimes one could think that, dreamily, she would encircle someone with her arms and rest her head on his shoulder; but when the happy man was melting with delight, she would suddenly make some movement that said that it was impossible to catch her, because she would either slip away, push him away, or simply order the lackey to lead her admirer out the door…

An interesting phenomenon was the soul of Miss Isabela.

If someone were to ask her honestly: what is the world and what is she? she would undoubtedly answer that the world is an enchanted garden filled with magic castles, and she is a goddess or nymph trapped in corporeal forms.

Miss Isabella lived from the cradle in a beautiful world, not only superhuman, but also supernatural. She slept in down, dressed in silk and embroidery, and sat on carved and upholstered ebony chairs. or rosewood , she drank from crystal, ate from silver and porcelain as precious as gold.

For her, there were no seasons, only an eternal spring, full of soft light, lively flowers, and fragrances. There were no times of day, for sometimes for months she went to bed at eight in the morning and ate dinner at two in the afternoon. There were no differences in geographical locations, for in Paris, Vienna, Rome, Berlin, or London there were the same people, the same customs, the same equipment, and even the same dishes: soups made from Pacific seaweed, oysters from the North Sea, fish from the Atlantic or the Mediterranean, game from every country, fruit from every part of the world. Even gravity did not exist for her, for chairs were pushed out to her, plates were served, she herself was carried in the street, led up stairs, carried up mountains.

A veil protected her from the wind, a carriage from the rain, sables from the cold, an umbrella and gloves from the sun. And so she lived from day to day, from month to month, from year to year, superior to people, and even to the laws of nature.Twice she was met with a terrible storm, once in the Alps, the second — in the Mediterranean. The bravest were petrified, but Miss Isabel listened with laughter to the clatter of shattered rocks and the creaking of the ship, not suspecting the possibility of danger. Nature had arranged for her a beautiful spectacle of lightning, stones and sea depths, as at another time the moon had shown her over Lake Geneva. or at the Rhine Falls tore apart the clouds that hid the sun. Theatre machinists do the same thing every day, and even nervous ladies are not afraid of them.

This world of eternal spring, where silks rustled, only carved trees grew, and the clay was covered with artistic paintings, this world had its special population. Its proper inhabitants were princesses and princes, countesses and counts, and very old and wealthy nobility of both sexes. There were also married ladies and married gentlemen as housekeepers, matrons who guarded refined manners and good manners, and old gentlemen who sat in the first places at the table, announced the youth, blessed them, and played cards. There were also bishops, images of God on earth, high officials whose presence protected the world from social disorder and earthquakes, and finally children, little cherubs, sent from heaven so that the elderly could organize children's balls. .

Among the permanent population of the enchanted world, from time to time, an ordinary mortal appeared who, on the wings of reputation, was able to soar to the heights of Olympus. Usually, it was some engineer who connected oceans or drilled or built the Alps. There was some captain who lost his company in a fight with savages, and himself, covered with wounds, survived thanks to the love of a Negro princess. There was a traveler who supposedly discovered a new part of the world, was shipwrecked on a desert island, and at least tasted human flesh.

There were famous painters there, and above all, inspired poets who wrote in their albums Countess girls wrote beautiful poems, they could love each other without hope and immortalized the charms of their cruel goddesses first in newspapers and then in separate volumes printed on vellum paper .

All this population, among whom the braided men were carefully moving Lackeys, ladies-in-waiting, poor cousins ​​and cousins ​​eager for higher positions, all of these people celebrated the eternal holiday.

From noon they made and returned visits and visits to each other or gathered in the warehouses. Towards evening they had fun before dinner, during dinner and after dinner.Then they went to a concert or to the theater, to see another artificial world, where the heroes rarely eat or work, but instead talk to themselves all the time - where women's infidelity becomes the source of great disasters and where the lover, killed by her husband in the fifth act, resurrects the next day in the first act, to make the same mistakes and talk to themselves without being heard by the people standing next to them. After leaving the theater, they gathered in the drawing rooms again, where servants carried hot and cold drinks, hired artists sang, young married women listened to the stories of a crazy captain about a Negro princess, young ladies talked to poets about the affinity of souls, old gentlemen explained their views on engineering to engineers, and middle-aged ladies fought with half-words and glances for a traveler who ate human flesh. Then they sat down to supper, where mouths ate, stomachs digested, and shoes talked about the feelings of icy hearts and the dreams of undizzying heads. And then - they went their separate ways, so that in a real dream they could gain strength for the dream of life.

Beyond this magical world there was another world – the ordinary one.

Miss Izabela knew of its existence and even liked to look at it from the window of a carriage, a wagon or from her own apartment. In such a frame and from such a distance it seemed to her picturesque and even likeable. She saw farmers slowly ploughing the land - large carts pulled by a skinny horse - fruit and vegetable carriers - an old man who broke stones on the road - messengers going somewhere in a hurry - pretty and intrusive flower sellers - a family consisting of a father, a very obese mother and four children, holding hands in pairs - a dandy of the lower class who rode in a cab and sprawled in a very amusing way - sometimes a funeral. And she told herself that that other world, although lower, was pretty; it was even prettier than genre paintings because it moves and changes every moment.

And Miss Izabela also knew that just as flowers grow in conservatories and grapes in vineyards, so in that other, lower world, things she needs grow. Her faithful Mikołaj and Anusia come from there, they make carved armchairs, porcelain, crystal and curtains there, polishers are born there , upholsterers, gardeners and dressmakers.Once, when she was in the warehouse, she asked to be taken to the sewing room and found it very interesting to see dozens of female workers cutting, basting and arranging folds of clothes on the forms. She was sure that it gave them great pleasure, because the young ladies who took her measurements or tried on dresses were always smiling and very interested in making sure that the clothes fit her well.

And Miss Izabela also knew that in the other, ordinary world there were unhappy people. So she ordered every poor person, if he met her, to give a few złoty; once, when she met a miserable mother with a child as pale as wax at her breast, she gave her a bracelet, and she gave dirty, begging children candy and kissed them with pious affection. It seemed to her that in one of these poor people, or perhaps in each one, there was a hidden Christ, who had blocked her way to give her an opportunity to perform a good deed.

In general, she had a kind heart for people from the lower world. The words of the Holy Scripture came to her mind: "In the sweat of your brow you will labor." They must have committed some grave sin, since they were sentenced to work; but angels like her could not help but pity their fate. Angels like her, for whom the greatest work was to touch an electric bell or to give an order.

Only once did the lower world make a powerful impression on her.

One day, in France, she was visiting an iron factory. Coming down a mountain, in a region full of forests and meadows, under a sapphire sky, she saw an abyss filled with clouds of black smoke and white vapors, and heard the dull roar, grinding, and panting of machines. Then she saw furnaces like the towers of medieval castles, breathing flames—powerful wheels that turned with lightning speed—great scaffolding that rolled itself along the rails—streams of white-hot iron and half-naked workers like bronze statues with grim looks. Above all this—a bloody glow, the roar of wheels, the groan of bellows, the thunder of hammers, and the impatient breathing of boilers, and underfoot the shiver of the frightened earth.

Then it seemed to her that she had descended from the heights of happy Olympus into the hopeless abyss of Vulcan. where the Cyclopes They strike with lightning bolts that could shatter Olympus itself. Legends of rebellious giants, of the end of this beautiful world she inhabited, came to her mind, and for the first time in her life she, the goddess before whom marshals and senators bowed, was seized with fear.

“These are terrible people, Papa…” she whispered to her father.

Her father remained silent, but pressed her arm tighter.

— But they won't do anything bad to women?

— Yes, even them — replied Mr. Tomasz.

At that moment Miss Isabella was overcome with shame at the thought that she had cared only for women. So she quickly added:

— And if they do to us, they won’t do anything bad to you either…

But Mr. Tomasz smiled and shook his head. At that time there was much talk about the approaching end of the old world, and Mr. Tomasz felt it deeply, with great difficulty extracting money from his proxies.

Visiting the factory was an important epoch in Miss Izabela's life. She read the poetry of her distant cousin, Zygmunt, with religious devotion. , and it seemed to her that today she had found an illustration for the Non-Divine Comedy . From then on, she often dreamed at dusk that on the sun-drenched hill from where her carriage went down to the factory, stood the Holy Trinity Trenches and in that valley, covered with smoke and steam, there was a camp of rebel democrats, ready at any moment to storm and destroy her beautiful world.

Only now did she understand how passionately she loved this spiritual homeland of hers, where crystal spiders replaced the sun, carpets the earth, statues and columns the trees. This second homeland, which embraces the aristocracy of all nations, the refinement of all times and the most beautiful achievements of civilization.

And all this should collapse, die or scatter!… The knightly youth who sing with such feeling, dance with grace, duel with a smile or jump into the water in the middle of the lake for a lost flower?… Should those beloved friends who covered her with so many caresses, or sitting at her feet told her so many little secrets, or, far away from her, wrote such long, very long letters in which tender feelings were mixed with extremely questionable spelling, perish?

And those good servants who treat their masters as if they had sworn undying love, fidelity, and obedience to them? And those milliners who always greet her with a smile and remember the smallest detail of her toilette know so precisely about her triumphs?And those beautiful horses, whose flight a swallow could envy, and those dogs wise and affectionate as humans, and those gardens where the human hand raised hills, poured streams, shaped trees?… And all this was to disappear one day?…

From these reflections a new expression came to Miss Izabela's face—a gentle sadness that made her even more beautiful. They said that she had already matured completely.

Understanding that the great world is a higher world, Miss Isabella slowly learned that one can soar to these heights and permanently reside there only with the help of two wings: birth and fortune. Birth and fortune are attached to certain chosen families, like the blossom and fruit of the orange to the orange tree. It is also very possible that the good God, seeing two souls with beautiful surnames, connected by the bond of the sacrament, increases their income and sends them an angel to raise, who continues to maintain the fame of the families with his virtues, good manners and beauty. Hence the duty to enter into marriages with caution, which is what old ladies and aged gentlemen know best. The right choice of surnames and fortunes means everything. For love, not the crazy kind that poets dream of, but truly Christian love, appears only after the sacrament and it is quite enough for the wife to be able to present herself beautifully at home and for the husband to assist her with dignity in the world.

This is how it used to be and it was good, according to the unanimous opinion of all the matrons. Today it has been forgotten and it is bad: misalliances are multiplying and large families are falling apart.

“And there is no happiness in marriage,” added Miss Izabela quietly, to whom the young married women had told more than one household secret.

Even from these stories she had acquired a great distaste for marriage and a slight contempt for men.

A husband in a dressing gown who yawns near his wife, kisses her with his mouth full of cigar smoke, often says: "Leave me alone," or simply: "You're stupid!..." - this husband who makes a fuss at home for a new hat, and spends money on outfits for actresses in the backyard, is not an interesting creature at all. What's worse, each of them was an ardent admirer before marriage, grew miserable when he didn't see his lady for a long time, blushed when he met her, and more than one even promised to shoot himself for love.

So, at the age of eighteen, Miss Isabela tyrannized men with coldness. When Victor Emmanuel once kissed her hand, she begged her father that they would leave Rome that same day. In Paris, a wealthy French count proposed to her; she replied that she was Polish and would not marry a foreigner. She pushed away the Podolian magnate with the opinion that she would only give her hand to the one she loved, which was not yet in sight, and she dismissed the proposal of some American millionaire with a burst of laughter.

This behavior created a void around the young lady for several years. She was admired and adored, but from a distance; no one wanted to expose themselves to a mocking rejection.

After the first distaste, Miss Izabela understood that marriage must be accepted as it is. She was already determined to get married, but on the condition that the future companion — she liked, had a beautiful name and an appropriate fortune. Indeed, she came across handsome, wealthy and titled men; unfortunately, however, none of them combined all three conditions, so — again several years passed.

Suddenly, news spread about the poor state of Mr. Tomasz's business, and out of the entire legion of competitors, Miss Isabella was left with only two serious ones: a certain baron and a certain marshal. , rich but old.

Now Miss Izabela noticed that the ground was shifting under her feet in the great world, so she decided to lower the scale of her demands. But since the baron and the marshal, despite their fortunes, aroused in her an invincible aversion, she put off a decisive decision from day to day. In the meantime, Mr. Tomasz broke with the company. The marshal, unable to wait for an answer, left for the country, the distressed baron went abroad and - Miss Izabela was left completely alone. True, she knew that each of them would return at the first beck and call, but - which one to choose? ... how to suppress the aversion? ... Above all, is it possible to make such a sacrifice of herself, having some certainty that she will regain her fortune someday, and knowing that then she will be able to choose again. This time she will choose, having learned how hard it is for her to live outside the company of salons ...

One thing made it much easier for her to marry for her position. Miss Isabella had never been in love. This was due to her cold temperament, her belief that marriage would be possible without poetic additions, and finally, her ideal love, the strangest one anyone had ever heard of. She once saw a statue of Apollo in a sculpture gallery. , which made such a strong impression on her that she bought a beautiful copy and placed it in her study. She gazed at it for hours, thought about it, and who knows how many kisses warmed the hands and feet of the marble deity? ... And a miracle happened: the stone, caressed by the loving woman, came to life. And when she fell asleep one night, in tears, the immortal descended from his pedestal and came to her with a laurel wreath on his head, shining with a mystical shine.

He sat on the edge of her bed, looked at her for a long time with eyes that looked into eternity, then embraced her in a powerful embrace and with kisses of his white lips wiped away her tears and cooled her fever.

From then on he visited her more and more often, and as she fainted in his embrace he, the god of light, whispered the secrets of heaven and earth, which had not yet been uttered in mortal language. And through his love for her he worked an even greater miracle, for in his divine face he showed her one by one the beautified features of those men who had ever impressed her.

Once he resembled a rejuvenated hero-general who had won a battle and watched the death of several thousand brave men from the heights of his saddle. The second time he resembled the face of the most famous tenor, to whom women threw flowers at his feet and men unharnessed horses from their carriages. Another time he was a cheerful and handsome prince of the blood of one of the oldest ruling houses; another time a brave firefighter who received the Legion of Honor for pulling three people out of the flames on the fifth floor. ; at one time he was a great draughtsman who overwhelmed the world with the richness of his imagination, and at another time a Venetian gondolier or a circus athlete of extraordinary beauty and strength.

Each of these people occupied Miss Isabella's secret thoughts for a time, to each she devoted the quietest sighs, understanding that for some reason or other she could not love him and - each of them, thanks to the deity, appeared in his form, in half-real dreams. And from these visions Miss Isabella's eyes took on a new expression - of some supernatural contemplation. Sometimes they looked somewhere beyond people and beyond the world; and when her ashen hair on her forehead was arranged so strangely, as if a mysterious breeze had blown it away, it seemed to the onlookers that they saw an angel or a saint.

A year ago, at one of these moments, he saw Miss Izabela Wokulski. From then on, his heart had no peace.

Almost at the same time, Mr. Tomasz broke with the society and, as a sign of his revolutionary disposition, joined the Merchant Resursa. There, with the once neglected tanners, brushmakers and distillers he played whist, proclaiming right and left that the aristocracy should not close itself in exclusivity, but should lead the enlightened bourgeoisie, and through them the nation. In return, the proud tanners, brushmakers and distillers of today deigned to admit that Mr. Tomasz was the only aristocrat who understood his duties towards the country and fulfilled them conscientiously. They could have added: he fulfills them every day from nine in the evening until midnight.

And while Mr. Tomasz thus bore the yoke of his position, Miss Izabela was consuming herself in the solitude and silence of her beautiful premises. More than once Mikołaj was already fast asleep in an armchair, Miss Florentyna, having stuffed her ears with cotton wool, was fast asleep, and sleep, chased away by memories, had not yet knocked on Miss Izabela's room. Then she would jump out of bed and, dressed in a light dressing gown, walk for hours in the drawing room, where the carpet muffled her steps and there was only as much light as the two meager street lamps threw.

She walked around, and the huge room was crowded with sad thoughts and visions of people who had been here before. Here an old duchess is dozing; here two countesses are consulting the prelate. Can a child be baptized with rose water? ? Here a swarm of young people turned longing glances at her or tried to arouse her curiosity with feigned coolness; and there a garland of maidens who caressed her with their eyes, admired her or envied her. Full of lights, rustles, conversations, most of which, like butterflies around flowers, circled her beauty. Wherever she was, everything around her paled; other women were her background, and men her slaves.

And all that is over!… And today in this living room – cold, dark and empty… There is only her and the invisible spider of sadness, which always covers with its gray web those places where we were happy and from where happiness has fled. It has already fled!… Miss Izabela wrung her fingers to restrain herself from tears, of which she was ashamed even in emptiness and at night.

Everyone had left her except Countess Charles, who, when her bad mood rose, would come here and, sitting wide on the sofa, would say amidst sighs:

— Yes, my dear Belcia, you must admit that you have made some unforgivable mistakes. I am not talking about Victor Emmanuel, because that was a passing whim of a somewhat liberal king. and besides, very much in debt. For such relations one must have more – I won’t say: tact, but – experience – the countess continued, modestly lowering her eyelids. – But to release or – if you want – dismiss the Count Saint-Auguste, forgive me!… A young, wealthy man, very well, and with such a career!… Now he is leading a deputation to the Holy Father and will probably receive a special blessing for the whole family, and the Count of Chambord she calls him her cousin … Oh, God!

"I think it's too late to worry about that, Auntie," said Miss Isabella.

"But I want to worry you, poor child! Even without that, you are in for blows that only deep faith can soothe. You know, of course, that your father has lost everything, even the rest of your dowry?"

— What can I do about it?

"And yet, only you can advise, and you should," the countess said emphatically. "The marshal is not Adonis, though." , well — but… If our duties were easy to fulfill, there would be no merit. Besides, my God, who prevents us from having some ideal deep in our souls, the thought of which sweetens the most difficult moments? Finally, I can assure you that the situation of a beautiful woman with an old husband is not one of the worst. Everyone is interested in her, talks about her, pays homage to her devotion, and on the other hand, an old husband is less demanding than a middle-aged husband…

— Oh, auntie…

- But don't be so exalted, Belciu! You're not sixteen and you have to look at life seriously. You can't do it for the sake of some idiosyncrasy. sacrifice your father's existence, and even Flora's and your servants. Finally, think how much good you, with your noble heart, could do by disposing of a considerable fortune.

"But, auntie, the marshal is disgusting. He doesn't need a wife, but a nurse to wipe his lips."

— I don't insist on the marshal, so the baron…

— The Baron is even older, dyes his hair, uses rouge, and has some spots on his hands.

The Countess rose from the couch.

"I'm not pressing you, my dear. I'm not a matchmaker, that's Mrs. Meliton's job. I'm just pointing out that disaster is hanging over your father."

— We have a tenement house.

—Which they sell furthest after St. John, so that even your sum will fall.

— What do you mean, a house that cost a hundred thousand will be sold for sixty?…

- Because it's not worth more, because my father spent too much. I know this from the builder who looked at it on Krzeszowska's orders.

- So, in the end, we have a set of... silver... - burst out Miss Izabela, wringing her hands.

The Countess kissed her several times.

- Dear, beloved child - she said, sobbing - that I, too, must hurt your heart like this!... So listen... Father still has debts on bills of exchange, a few thousand rubles. So these debts... you think... someone collected these debts... a few days ago, at the end of March. We assume that Krzeszowska did it...

"What a despicable thing!" whispered Miss Isabella. "But never mind that... My service and silverware will suffice to cover the few thousand rubles."

— They are worth incomparably more, but — who would buy such expensive things nowadays?

- I'll try anyway - said Miss Izabela feverishly. - I'll ask Mrs. Meliton, she'll make it easier for me...

— However, consider whether it would be a pity to waste such beautiful souvenirs.

Miss Isabella laughed.

- Oh, auntie... So I have to hesitate between selling myself and the service?... Because I will never allow our furniture to be taken away... Oh, that Krzeszowska... that buying out of bills of exchange... what an abomination!

— Well, maybe it's not her yet.

— So I guess there's a new enemy who's worse than her.

"Maybe it's Aunt Honorata," the countess soothed her, "I don't know. Maybe she wants to help Tomasz, but by hanging a threat over him. But be well, my dear child, adieu." …

With that the conversation ended in Polish, heavily embellished with French, making it resemble a human face covered with a rash.

VI. How New People Appear Above Old Horizons
The beginning of April, one of those months that serve as a transition between winter and spring. The snow has already disappeared, but the green has not yet appeared; the trees are black, the lawns are gray, and the sky is gray: it looks like marble crossed with silver and gold threads.

It's about five in the afternoon. Miss Isabella is sitting in her study, reading Zola's latest novel. : A page of love She reads without attention, every now and then she raises her eyes, looks out of the window and half-consciously formulates the judgment that the branches of the trees are black and the sky is grey. She reads again, looks around the study and half-consciously thinks that her furniture covered with blue material and her blue dressing gown have some grey tint and that the festoons of the white curtain resemble large icicles of snow.Then she forgets what she was thinking at that moment and asks herself: "What was I thinking? ... Oh, right, about the Holy Week collection ..." And suddenly she feels like taking a ride in a carriage, and at the same time she feels sorry for the sky, because it is so grey, because the golden veins in it are so narrow ... A kind of quiet anxiety, a kind of expectation, torments her, but she is not sure what she is waiting for: for the clouds to break, or for the servant to come in and hand her a letter inviting her to the Holy Week collection? Such a short time already and she is not asked.

He reads the novel again, the chapter when, on a starry night, M. Rambaud was repairing little Joasia's broken doll. Helena was drowning in tears of pointless grief, and the abbot Jouve advised her to get married. Miss Isabella feels this sorrow and who knows, if at that moment the stars appeared in the sky instead of clouds, she would not cry like Helena. After all, it is only a few days until the collection and they have not asked her yet. She knows that they will invite her, but why are they delaying? ?…

"These women who seem to seek God so ardently are sometimes unhappy beings whose hearts have been stirred up by passion. They go to church to worship a man," said Abbot Jouve.

“The honest abbot, how he wanted to calm down that poor Helena!” thinks Miss Izabela and suddenly throws the book aside. Abbot Jouve reminded her that she had been embroidering the church bell belt for two months and that she had not finished it yet. She got up from her chair and moved the table with the tambourine to the window. , with a box of multi-colored silks with a colorful pattern; she unrolls her belt and begins to embroider roses and crosses on it zealously. Her heart is filled with hope under the influence of her work. Anyone who serves the Church as she does cannot be forgotten during the Holy Week collection. She chooses silks, threads needles and sewing still.Her eye runs from the pattern to the embroidery, her hand falls from the top to the bottom, rises from the bottom to the top, but a question begins to arise in her mind about the costume for the graves and the toilet for Easter. This question soon fills her whole attention, she covers her eyes and stops her hand. The dress, the hat, the wrap and the parasol, everything must be new, and here so little time and not only nothing ordered, but not even chosen!…

Here she remembers that her set and silverware are already at the jeweler's, that a buyer is already being found and that today or tomorrow they will be sold. Miss Izabela feels a pang in her heart for the set and silverware, but she experiences some relief at the thought of the collection and a new toilet. She may have a very beautiful one, but what kind?

He moves the tambourine away and from the table on which there are Shakespeare, Dante, an album of European celebrities and a few magazines, he takes: "Le Moniteur de la Mode" and begins to look through it with the greatest attention. Here is the dinner toilette; here are spring clothes for young ladies, maidens, married women, young married women and their mothers; here are formal dresses, ceremonial dresses, and walking dresses; six new forms of hats, made of ten materials, dozens of colors... What to choose, oh God?... It is impossible to choose without consulting Miss Florentyna and the storekeeper...

Miss Isabela reluctantly throws away the fashion monitor and sits on the chaise longue in a half-sitting position. She rests her hands, clasped as if in prayer, on the railing, her head on her hands and looks at the sky with dreamy eyes. The Holy Week question, the new toilet, the clouds in the sky, all are mixed in her imagination against the background of regret for the set and a slight feeling of shame at selling it.

“Oh, it doesn't matter!” she says to herself, and again wishes that the clouds would break up, even for a moment. But the clouds are thickening, and the regret, shame, and anxiety in her heart are growing stronger. Her gaze falls on the table standing right next to the chaise-longue, and on the ivory-bound prayer book.Miss Isabella takes the book in her hands and slowly, page by page, searches for the prayers in it: Acte de resignation and having found it, he begins to read:

“Que votre nom soit beni à jamais, bien qui avez voulu m'éprouver par cette peine.” As he reads, the grey sky clears up, and at the last words… “et d'attendre en paix votre divin secours…” , the clouds break, a piece of pure blue appears, Miss Izabela's office is filled with light, and her soul with peace. Now she is certain that her prayers have been answered, that she will have the most beautiful toilet and the best church to collect money in.

At that moment the door to the office opens gently; Miss Florentyna stands there, tall, dressed in black, shy, holding a letter between two fingers and saying quietly:

— From Mrs. Karol.

“Oh, about the collection,” Miss Izabela replies with a charming smile.— You haven't looked at me all day, Florcia.

— I don't want to disturb you.

- In boredom? ... - asks Miss Izabela. - Who knows, maybe it would be more fun for us to be bored in one room.

“A letter…” says a shy person in a black dress, extending her hand to Isabella.

- I know its contents - Miss Izabela interrupts. - Stay with me for a while and if she doesn't give you a subjection , read this letter.

Miss Florentyna sits down timidly in an armchair, delicately takes a knife from the desk and with the greatest care cuts the envelope. She puts the knife on the desk, then the envelope, unfolds the paper and in a quiet, melodic voice reads a letter written in French:

"Dear Belu! Forgive me for speaking on a matter that only you and your father have the right to decide. I know, dear child, that you are getting rid of this service and silverware, and you told me so yourself. I also know that a buyer has been found, who is offering you five thousand rubles, which in my opinion is too little, although it is hard to expect more these days. However, after the conversation I had on this matter with Krzeszowska, I am beginning to fear that these beautiful keepsakes may fall into the wrong hands.

I would like to prevent this, so I propose to you, if you agree, a loan of three thousand rubles on security for the aforementioned service and silverware. I think that today it will be more convenient for them to stay with me, since your father is in such trouble. You can take them back whenever you want, and in the event of my death even without repaying the loan.

I am not imposing, I am just suggesting. Consider how it will be more convenient for you, and above all, think about the consequences.

If I know you, you would be sorely hurt if you heard that our family heirlooms adorned the table of some banker or belonged to his daughter's trousseau.

I send you thousands of kisses.

Joan

PS Imagine what luck my orphanage had. Yesterday, when I was in the shop of the famous Wokulski, I asked for a small donation for the orphans. I was counting on a dozen or so rubles, and he, would you believe it, offered me a thousand, clearly: a thousand rubles, and he also said that he would not dare to put a smaller sum in my hands. A few such Wokulskis, and I feel that in my old age I would become a democrat.”

Miss Florentyna, having finished the letter, did not dare to take her eyes off it. Finally, she dared and looked: Miss Izabela was sitting on the chaise-longue, pale, with her hands clenched.

"What do you think about it, Florcia?" she asked after a while.

"I think," she replied quietly when asked, "that Mrs. Karolowa expressed her position on this matter most accurately at the beginning of her letter."

“What a humiliation!” whispered Miss Izabela, nervously tapping the chaise longue with her hand.

—It is humiliating to offer someone three thousand rubles as security for silver, when strangers are offering five thousand… I don't see any other way.

— How she treats us… I think we are really ruined…

"But, Belciu!..." Miss Florentyna interrupted, becoming animated. "This very bitter letter proves that you are not ruined. Auntie likes to be bitter, but she knows how to spare misfortune. If you were threatened with ruin, you would find in her a tender and delicate comforter."

— Thank you for that.

- And you don't have to worry about that. Tomorrow we'll get five thousand rubles, which will cover the cost of running the house for half a year... even a quarter. In a few months...

— They’ll auction off our tenement house…

"A simple form, and nothing more. Yes, you can gain, whereas today the tenement house is only a burden. And after Aunt Hortensia you will get about a hundred thousand rubles. Besides," added Miss Florentyna after a while, raising her eyebrows, "I myself am not sure whether Father does not still have some fortune. Everyone thinks so..."

Miss Isabella leaned out of the chaise longue and took Miss Florentyna's hand.

"Florcia," she said, lowering her voice, "who are you talking to? ... So you really consider me just a marriageable girl who sees nothing and understands nothing? ... Do you think I don't know," she continued even more quietly, "that you've been borrowing money from Nicholas for a month now to maintain the house..."

— Maybe that's what father wants...

—Does he also want you to put a few rubles in his pocket every morning?

Miss Florentyna looked into her eyes and moved her head.

"You know too much," she replied, "but not everything. For two weeks, maybe ten days, I've noticed that Father has been getting a dozen or so rubles a day..."

— So he gets into debt…

"No, Father never takes out debts in the city. Every creditor comes to the house with a loan and receives a receipt or interest in Father's study. You don't know him in that respect."

— So where does he get the money now?

— I don't know. I see he has them, and I hear he always has.

“Then why does he allow the sale of silverware?” asked Miss Izabela persistently.

— Maybe he wants to irritate his family.

— And who redeemed his bills of exchange?

Miss Florentyna made a gesture of resignation with her hands.

"Krzeszowska didn't buy them out," she said, "I know that for sure." "So either Aunt Hortensja or..."

- Or?…

— Or the father himself. Don't you know how many things a father does to worry his family and then laugh…

— Why would he want to bother me or us?

— She thinks you're calm. A daughter should trust her father completely.

— Oh, yes!... — whispered Miss Izabela, lost in thought.

The cousin dressed in black slowly rose from her chair and quietly left.

Miss Isabella began to look again at her room, which seemed ashen to her, at the black twigs that were swaying outside the window, at a couple of sparrows chirping perhaps about building a nest, at the sky, which had become uniformly grey, without a single lighter stripe. The matter of the collection and the new toilet came back to her mind, but both seemed so small, so almost ridiculous, that thinking about them she shrugged her shoulders slightly.

She was tormented by other questions: should she not give the set to Countess Karlova? And where did her father get the money? If he had it in the past, why did he allow Nicholas to get into debt?… And if he didn’t, from what source did he get it today?… If she gave the set and the silverware to her aunt, she might lose the opportunity to get rid of them profitably, and if she sold it for five thousand, these heirlooms really might fall into the wrong hands, as the countess wrote.

Suddenly this train of thought was interrupted: her sharp ear heard a rustle in the other rooms. It was a man's footsteps, measured, calm. In the drawing room they were muffled somewhat by the carpet, in the dining room they were amplified, in her bedroom they were hushed, as if someone were walking on tiptoe.

“Come in, Papa,” said Miss Isabella, hearing the knock on her door.

Mr. Tomasz entered. She rose from the chaise-longue, but her father would not allow it. He embraced her, kissed her on the head, and before sitting down next to her, he glanced at the large mirror on the wall. There he saw his beautiful face, his gray mustache, his dark jacket. impeccable, smooth trousers, as if they had just come from the tailor, and he decided that everything was fine.

"I hear," he said to his daughter, smiling, "that the young lady is receiving correspondence that is spoiling her mood."

—Oh, Papa, if you only knew the tone in which Aunt speaks…

— Probably in the tone of a person who is nervous. You can't blame her for that.

— If only it were a pity. I am afraid that she is right and that our silverware may really end up on some banker's table.

She leaned her head against her father's shoulder. Mr. Tomasz glanced involuntarily at the mirror on the table and admitted to himself that they both made a very beautiful group at that moment. The fear spread across his daughter's face contrasted particularly well with his calmness. He smiled.

- Bankers' tables! ... - he repeated. - The silver of our ancestors has already been on the tables of Tatars, Cossacks, rebellious peasants, and not only did it not offend us, but it even brought us honor. He who fights exposes himself to losses.

“They lost because of the war and in the war,” said Miss Izabela.

— And there is no war today?… Only the weapon has changed: instead of a scythe or a scimitar, they fight with the ruble. Joasia understood this well, selling not a service, but a family estate, or dismantling the ruins of a castle to build a granary.

- So we are defeated!... - whispered Miss Isabella.

- No, child - replied Mr. Tomasz, straightening up. - We are just beginning to triumph, and perhaps that is what my sister and her clique are afraid of. They are so deeply asleep that every sign of vitality, every bold step of mine, shocks them, he added as if to himself.

— Yours, Papa?

— Yes. They thought I would ask them for help. Joasia herself would gladly make me her plenipotentiary. I, on the other hand, thanked them for my pension and became closer to the bourgeoisie. I gained a respect among these people that is beginning to frighten our circles. They thought I would recede into the background, but they see that I can come to the fore.

— You, Papa?

— Me. Until now I have been silent because I have not had suitable executors. Today I have found one who understood my ideas, and I will start acting.

"Who is that?" asked Miss Isabella, looking at her father with astonishment.

— A certain Wokulski, a merchant, an iron man. With his help I will organize our townspeople, create a company for trade with the East, in this way I will raise industry…

— You, Papa?

— And then we will see who will come out on top, even in the possible elections to the city council. …

Miss Isabela listened with her eyes wide open.

"Isn't this man," she whispered, "of whom you speak, Papa, some kind of swindler, an adventurer?"

- So you don't know him? - asked Mr. Tomasz. - But he is one of our suppliers.

"I know the shop, it's very nice," said Miss Izabela, lost in thought. "There's an old salesman there who looks a bit odd, but is extraordinarily polite... Oh, I think I met the owner a few days ago... He looks like a boor..."

- Wokulski boor? ... - Mr. Tomasz was surprised. - He is a bit stiff, but very polite.

Miss Isabela shook her head.

"An unpleasant man," she replied animatedly. "Now I remember him... When I was in the shop on Tuesday, I asked him the price of the fan. You should have seen the way he looked at me!..." He didn't answer, just stretched out his huge red hand to the shop assistant (a rather elegant boy, even) and muttered in a voice that was full of anger: Mr. Morawski or Mraczewski (because I don't remember), you're asking the price of the fan. And... Papa, you've found an uninteresting partner!..." Miss Izabela laughed.

- A man of crazy energy, an iron man - replied Mr. Tomasz. - They are like that. You will meet them, because I am thinking of organizing a few meetings at home. All original, but this one is more original than the others.

— Papa wants to receive these gentlemen?…

"I must consult with some of them. And as for ours," he added, looking into his daughter's eyes, "I assure you that when they hear who is visiting me, not one of them will be missing in the drawing room."

At that moment Miss Florentyna entered, inviting them to dinner. Mr. Tomasz shook his daughter's hand and the three of them went to the dining room, where there was already a vase and Mikołaj dressed in a tailcoat and a large white tie.

"I'm laughing at Belcia," said Mr. Tomasz to his cousin, who was pouring broth from a tureen. "Imagine, Flora, that Wokulski gave her the impression of being a boor. Do you know him?"

- Who wouldn't know Wokulski today - answered Miss Florentyna, handing Mikołaj a plate for the master. - Well, he's not elegant, but - he makes an impression...

“The trunk with the red hands,” Miss Isabella interjected with a laugh.

"He reminds me of Trosti, remember, Belu, the colonel of the riflemen in Paris," replied Mr. Tomasz.

— And I want a statue of a triumphant gladiator. — added Miss Florentyna in a melodious voice. — Do you remember Belu, in Florence, the one with the raised sword? A stern face, even wild, but beautiful.

— And the red hands?… — asked Miss Izabela.

“He had them unfrozen in Siberia,” Miss Florentyna interjected with an accent.

— What was he doing there?

"He was atonement for the passions of youth," said Mr. Tomasz. "He can be forgiven for that."

— Oh, so he is a hero!…

“And a millionaire,” added Miss Florentyna.

"And a millionaire?" Miss Isabella repeated. "I'm starting to believe that Papa made a good choice in taking him on as a partner. Although..."

“Even though?” asked the father.

— What will the world say about this company?

— He who has strength in his hands has the world at his feet.

Nicholas had just brought the tenderloin when the bell rang in the anteroom. The old servant went out and returned a moment later with a letter on a silver, or perhaps plated, tray.

“From the Countess,” he said.

- To you, Belu - added Mr. Tomasz, taking the letter in his hand. - Allow me to take your place in swallowing this new pill.

He opened the letter, began to read it, and laughingly handed it to Miss Isabella.

- Here - he cried - all of Joasia is in this letter. Nerves, always nerves!...

Miss Isabella pushed the plate away and anxiously ran her eyes over the paper. But gradually her face brightened.

“Listen, Florcia,” she said, “because it's interesting.

"Dear Bela!" writes her aunt. "Forget about my previous letter, my angel. As a result, your service is of no interest to me, and we will find another one when you get married.But I mean that you should definitely ask only with me, and that is what I intended to write about previously, not about the service. My poor nerves! If you do not want to completely unsettle them, you must agree to my request.

The tomb in our church will be wonderful. My good Wokulski gives a fountain, artificial singing birds, a music box which will play only serious songs, and lots of carpets. Hozer he delivers flowers, and amateurs organize an organ concert , violin, cello and voices.I am delighted, but if I were not to be among these wonders of you, I would fall ill. So?… I hug you and kiss you a thousand times, loving aunt.

Joan

Postscript. Tomorrow we're going to the warehouse to order a spring suit for you. I'd die if you didn't accept it."

Miss Isabella was radiant. This letter fulfilled all her hopes.

- Wokulski is incomparable! - said Mr. Tomasz, laughing. - He took Joasia by storm, and she will not only not reproach me for being a partner, but will even be ready to fight me for it.

Santa served the chickens.

“He must be a brilliant man after all,” said Miss Florentyna.

- Wokulski? ... no, no - said Mr. Tomasz. - He is a man of crazy energy, but as for the gift of scheming, I would not say that he possesses it to a high degree.

— It seems to me that he gives evidence of this.

- All these are proofs of only energy - replied Mr. Tomasz. - The gift of combination, the brilliant mind is recognized in other things, even... in the game. I play picket with him quite often. , where you absolutely have to be resourceful. The result is that I lost eight to ten rubles and won about seventy, although — I have no claims to genius! — he added modestly.

Miss Isabella's fork fell from her hand. She turned pale and, clutching her forehead, whispered:

— Ah!… ah!…

Father and Miss Florentyna jumped up from their chairs.

- What's wrong with you, Belu?... - asked Mr. Tomasz, worried.

"Nothing," she replied, getting up from the table, "a migraine. I've felt like I'm going to get one for an hour... It's nothing, papa..."

She kissed her father's hand and went to her room.

"A sudden migraine should pass immediately," said Mr. Tomasz. "Go to her, Florcia. I'll go to the city for a moment, because I have to see a few people, but I'll be back before that. In the meantime, watch over her, dear Florcia, I'm asking you to," said Mr. Tomasz with the calm physiognomy of a man without whose orders or pleas there can be no good in the world.

"I'll go to her right away, I just need to tidy up here," replied Miss Florentyna, for whom order in the house was more important than anyone's migraine.

Already darkness has covered the land…Miss Isabella is alone in her study again; she has fallen onto the chaise-longue and covered her eyes with both hands. From under the cascade of fabrics flowing down to the floor, her narrow shoe and a piece of stocking have slipped out; but no one sees this and she does not think about it. At this moment her soul is again torn by anger, regret and shame. Her aunt has apologized to her, she herself will collect at the prettiest grave and will have the most beautiful costume; but despite this - she is unhappy... She experiences such feelings as if, having entered a full drawing room, she suddenly saw on her new costume a huge greasy stain of disgusting form and color, as if the dress had been rolled somewhere on the kitchen steps.The thought of it is so repulsive to her that saliva begins to flow into her mouth.

What a terrible situation!... They have been in debt to their valet for a month now, and for ten days her father has been winning money at cards for his petty expenses... It is possible to win; gentlemen win thousands, but - not to meet their basic needs, and certainly - not from merchants. Oh, if it were possible, she would fall at her father's feet and beg him not to play with these people, at least not now, when their financial situation is so difficult. In a few days, when she receives the money for her service, she herself will hand her father a few hundred rubles, asking him to play them to Mr. Wokulski, so that he may reward him more generously than she will reward Mikołaj for the debts he has incurred.

But is it appropriate for her to do this, or even to speak to her father about it?…

"Wokulski? ... Wokulski? ... - whispers Miss Izabela. - Who is this Wokulski who today so suddenly appeared to her from several sides, in various guises. What does he have to do with her aunt, with her father? ... "

And now it seemed to her that she had heard something about this man for several weeks. Some merchant had recently donated a few thousand rubles to charity, but she was not sure whether it was the women's clothing or fur merchant. Later, they said that it was also some merchant during the Bulgarian war. he has made a great fortune, but she has not paid attention to whether it was the shoemaker from whom she buys her shoes, or her hairdresser, who made the fortune? And only now does she remember that the merchant who gave the money to charity and the one who has made a great fortune are the same person, that this is the Wokulski who loses at cards to her father, and whom her aunt, the proud Countess Karolowa, calls: "my honest Wokulski!..."

At this moment she even remembers the face of that man who in the shop refused to speak to her, but, having retreated behind the huge Japanese vases, looked at her gloomily. How he looked at her…

One day she went with Miss Florentyna to buy chocolate at a confectionery shop, out of spite. They sat down by the window, behind which several ragged children had gathered. The children looked at her, at the chocolate and at the cakes with the curiosity and greed of hungry animals, and the merchant looked at her in the same way.

A slight shiver ran through Miss Izabela. And this is supposed to be her father's partner?... What is this partner for?... Where did her father get the idea to form some kind of trading association, to create some extensive plans that he had never dreamed of before?... Does he want to use the bourgeoisie to advance to the forefront of the aristocracy; does he want to be elected to the city council, which never existed and does not exist?...

But this Wokulski is really some kind of swindler, maybe a fraudster who needs a famous name to front his businesses. There have been such cases. How many beautiful names of German and Hungarian nobility have been immersed in commercial operations that she doesn't even understand, and her father probably no more.

It was already completely dark; the street lamps were lit, and their light fell into Miss Izabela's study, painting the window frame and the curtain rolls on the ceiling. It looked like a cross against the background of brightness, which was slowly being covered by a thick cloud.

“Where have I seen such a cross, such a cloud and such brightness?…” asked Miss Izabela. She began to recall the surroundings she had seen in her life and – to dream.

It seemed to her that she was riding in a carriage through some well-known place. The landscape resembled a huge ring, made of forests and green mountains, and her carriage was on the edge of the ring and was descending. Is it descending? Because it was neither approaching nor moving away from anything, as if it were standing still. But it was descending: you could see this in the image of the sun, which was reflected in the varnished wing of the carriage and, quivering, was slowly moving backwards. Besides, you could hear a clatter... Is that the clatter of a cab on the street?... No, it was the clatter of machines working somewhere deep in that ring of mountains and forests. You could even see there, at the bottom, a sort of lake of black smoke and white vapors, framed by greenery.

Now Miss Isabella notices her father, who is sitting by her side and attentively examining his fingernails, occasionally glancing at the landscape. The carriage is still standing on the edge of the ring, seemingly motionless, and only the image of the sun, reflected in the varnished wing, is slowly moving backwards. This apparent rest or hidden movement irritates Miss Isabella to a high degree. "Are we going or standing?" she asks her father. But her father does not answer, as if he did not see her; he examines his beautiful fingernails and sometimes casts a glance at the surroundings...

Suddenly (the carriage is still shaking and rattling) from the depths of the lake of black smoke and white vapors emerges half-figure. He has short-cropped hair, a swarthy face that resembles Trosti, the colonel of the riflemen (or maybe a gladiator from Florence?), and enormous red hands. He is dressed in a sooty shirt with sleeves rolled up above the elbow; in his left hand, close to his chest, he holds cards arranged in a fan, and in his right hand, which he has raised above his head, he holds a single card, apparently to throw it onto the front seat of the carriage. The rest of the figure cannot be seen through the smoke.

“What is he doing, Father?” asks the frightened Miss Isabella.

“He’s playing picket with me,” replies the father, also holding cards in his hands.

“What a terrible man he is, Papa!”

“Even such people don’t do anything bad to women,” replies Mr. Tomasz.

Only now does Miss Izabela notice that the man in the shirt is looking at her with a peculiar gaze, still holding the card above his head. The smoke and steam, boiling in the valley, at times cover his unbuttoned shirt and severe face; he is drowning in them - he is not there. Only from behind the smoke can you see the pale shine of his eyes, and above the smoke his bare hand to the elbow and - the card.

“What does this card mean, Papa?…” he asks his father.

But the father looks calmly at his cards and says nothing, as if he didn't see her.

"When will we finally leave this place?..."

But even though the carriage is shaking and the sun reflected in the wing is moving backwards, at the steps you can still see a lake of smoke and a man immersed in it, his hand above his head and - a card.

Miss Isabella is overcome with nervous anxiety, she focuses all her memories, all her thoughts to guess what the card this man is holding means?…

Is this the money he lost to his father at the picket? Probably not. Perhaps the offering he made to the Charity Society? And no. Perhaps the thousand rubles he gave to his aunt for protection, or perhaps it is a receipt for a fountain, birds, and carpets to cover the Lord's grave? ... So no; all this would not worry her.

Gradually Miss Isabella is filled with great fear. Perhaps these are her father's bills of exchange, which someone has recently redeemed?... In that case, having taken the money for the silver and the service, she will pay off this debt first and free herself from a similar creditor. But the man immersed in smoke still looks her in the eye and does not throw a card. So maybe... Ah!...

Miss Izabela jumps up from the chaise longue, knocks against a stool in the dark and rings with trembling hands. She rings a second time, no one answers, so she runs out into the hallway and meets Miss Florentyna in the doorway, who grabs her by the hand and says with surprise:

— What's wrong with you, Belcia?…

The light in the hallway brings Miss Izabela to her senses a little. She smiles.

— Take the lamp to my room, Florcia. Is Papa here?

— He left a moment ago.

— And Nicholas?

"He'll be back soon, he went to give the letter to the messenger. Is your headache worse?" asks Miss Florentyna.

— No — Miss Izabela laughs — I just dozed off and had a vision.

Miss Florentyna takes the lamp and she and her cousin go to her study. Miss Izabela sits on the chaise longue, shields her eyes from the light with her hand and says:

"You know, Florcia, I've made up my mind, I won't sell my silver to a stranger. They could really fall into God knows what hands. Sit down at my desk right now, if you'd be so kind, and write to auntie that... I accept her offer. Let her lend us three thousand rubles and let her take the set and the silverware."

Miss Florentyna looks at her with the utmost astonishment, then finally replies:

— It's impossible, Belciu.

- Why?…

— A quarter of an hour ago I received a letter from Mrs. Meliton that the silverware and the set had already been purchased.

- Already?... Who bought them? - exclaims Miss Izabela, grabbing her cousin's hands.

Miss Florentyna is confused.

"Allegedly, some merchant from Russia..." he says, but it seems he's not telling the truth.

- You know something, Florcia!... Please, tell me!... - Miss Izabela begs her. Her eyes fill with tears.

"I'll tell you anyway, just don't reveal the secret to your father," the cousin asks.

— So who?… Well, who bought it?…

—Wokulski — replies Miss Florentyna.

Miss Izabela's eyes dried up in an instant, turning steely. She pushes her cousin's hands away angrily, walks back and forth to her office, and finally sits down in the armchair opposite Miss Florentyna. She is no longer a frightened and nervous beauty, but a great lady who intends to judge someone from the staff, or perhaps expel them.

"Tell me, cousin," she says in a beautiful contralto voice, "what is this ridiculous plot you are hatching against me?"

- Me?... a conspiracy?... - Miss Florentyna repeats, pressing her breasts with her hands. - I don't understand you, Belu...

— Yes. You, Mrs. Meliton, and that… funny hero… Wokulski…

- Me and Wokulski?… - Miss Florentyna repeats. This time her surprise is so sincere that there is no doubt.

“Let’s assume you’re not conspiring,” Miss Isabella continues, “but you know something…”

— I know what everyone knows about Wokulski. He has a shop where we buy, he made a fortune in the war…

— And you haven't heard about him dragging Papa into the trading company?

Miss Florentyna's expressive eyes became very large.

"Your father is being dragged into a partnership?..." she said, shrugging her shoulders. "What partnership can he be dragged into?"

And at this moment he is afraid of his own words…

Miss Isabella could not doubt her innocence; she walked around the office a few times with the movements of a closed lioness and suddenly asked:

— At least tell me: what do you think about this man?

- What about Wokulski?... I don't think anything about him, except perhaps that he seeks fame and connections.

— So, for the sake of publicity, he offered a thousand rubles for protection?

— Certainly. He gave twice that much to charity.

— And why did he buy my set and silverware?

"Probably to sell them for a profit," replied Miss Florentyna. "In England they pay well for such things."

— And why... did he redeem Papa's bills of exchange?

"How do you know it's him? He would have no interest in that."

"I don't know anything," Miss Izabela said feverishly, "but I sense everything, I understand everything... This man wants to get closer to us..."

“He has already met his father,” said Miss Florentyna.

- So he wants to get closer to me!... - Miss Izabela exclaimed with an outburst. - I knew it from...

She was ashamed to add: “by his look.”

— Aren’t you being prejudiced, Belciu?…

— No. What I am experiencing at this moment is not prejudice, but rather clairvoyance. You have no idea how long I have known this man, or rather, how long he has been haunting me. Only now do I remember that a year ago there was no theatre performance, no concert, no lecture where I did not meet him, and only today does this… mindless figure seem terrible to me…

Miss Florentyna even stepped back from her seat, whispering:

— So you think he would dare…

— To have a taste for me? ... — Miss Izabela interrupted with a laugh. — I would not even dream of defending him. I am neither so naive nor so falsely modest as not to know that I am liked ... my God! even by the servants ... It used to anger me like the beggars who block our way on the streets, call at homes or write letters asking for support. But today — only I understood better the words of the Savior: "To whom much is given, of him much will be required." .

"Besides," she added, shrugging her shoulders, "men honor us with their adoration in such an unceremonious way that I am not only no longer surprised by their fawning or impertinent glances, but also by the fact that it is otherwise. If I meet a man in a drawing room who does not tell me of his sympathy and sufferings, or does not remain gloomy in silence in a way that betrays even greater sympathy and sufferings, or does not show me the icy indifference that is supposed to be a sign of the greatest sympathy and sufferings, then — I feel that something is missing, as if I had forgotten my fan or my handkerchief... Oh, I know them! all those Don Juans." , poets, philosophers, heroes, all those tender, disinterested, broken, dreamy or strong souls… I know the whole masquerade and I assure you I am having fun with it. Ha! ha! ha!… how funny they are…

"I don't understand you, Belciu..." Miss Florentyna interjected, spreading her hands.

— Don't you understand?... Then you're probably not a woman.

Miss Florentyna made a negative gesture, then a doubtful one.

"Listen," Miss Isabella interrupted. "We've lost our position in the world for a year now. Don't deny it, because that's the way it is, we all know it. Today we're ruined."

— You're exaggerating...

- Oh, Flora, don't comfort me, don't lie!... Didn't you hear at dinner that even the dozen or so rubles that my father has now are won at cards from...

Miss Izabela was trembling all over as she spoke. Her eyes were shining, her face was flushed.

- Well, at such a moment comes this... merchant, buys our bills of exchange, our service, possesses my father and aunt, that is - he surrounds me with nets on all sides like a hunter prey. He is no longer a sad admirer, he is no longer a rival who can be rejected, he is... a conqueror!... He does not sigh, but sneaks into aunt's favor, entangles my father's hands and feet, and wants to kidnap me by force, if not force me to surrender myself to him... Do you understand this refined baseness?

Miss Florentyna was frightened.

— Then you have a very simple method. Say…

- To whom and what? ... Or to my aunt, who is ready to support this gentleman in order to force me to give my hand to the marshal? ... Or should I tell my father, to frighten him and hasten the catastrophe? I will do only one thing: I will not allow my father to enlist in any companies, even if I have to drag myself at his feet, even if I have to ... forbid him to do so in the name of my deceased mother ....

Miss Florentyna looks at her with delight…

"Really, Belciu," she said, "you're exaggerating. With your energy and such brilliant intuition..."

— You don't know these people, and I've seen them at work. In their hands, steel rails curl like ribbons. They are terrible people. They know how to move all the earthly forces for their own purposes, forces that we don't even know. They know how to break, ensnare, grovel, risk everything, even — wait patiently...

— You speak based on the romance novels you read.

- I speak on the strength of my premonitions, which warn... they call out that this man went to war to win me over. And he has barely returned when he is already surrounding me from all sides. … But let him beware!… Does he want to buy me? Fine, let him buy!… he will find that I am very expensive… Does he want to catch me in a net?… Fine, let him spin it… but I will escape him, even into the arms of a marshal… Oh God! I did not even suspect how deep the abyss into which we were falling was until I saw such a bottom. From the salons of the Quirinal to the store... It's not even a fall, it's a disgrace...

She sat down on the chaise longue, cradled her head in her hands, and sobbed.

VII. The Dove Comes to Meet the Serpent
The Łęcki family's service and silverware had already been sold and even the jeweler returned the money to Mr. Tomasz, keeping for himself a hundred or so rubles of the stock. and for mediation.In spite of this, Countess Charles did not cease to love Miss Isabella; indeed, her energy and devotion, shown in the sale of souvenirs, awakened in the old lady's heart a new source of family feelings. Not only did she beg Miss Isabella to accept a beautiful costume, not only did she visit her every day or call her to her place, but (which was a proof of incredible grace) she offered her her carriage for the whole of Holy Wednesday.

"Take a ride around town, my angel," the countess said, kissing her niece, "and take care of some small errands. Just remember to look pretty for me when I collect it... As pretty as only you can!... Please..."

Miss Isabella said nothing, but her look and blush suggested that she would willingly fulfill her aunt's will.

On Holy Wednesday, at exactly eleven o'clock in the morning, Miss Isabella was already sitting in an open carriage with her constant companion, Miss Florentyna. Spring breezes were passing along the Avenue, spreading that special, raw scent that precedes the bursting of leaves on the trees and the appearance of primroses; the gray lawns took on a greenish hue; the sun was so hot that the ladies opened their umbrellas.

“A beautiful day,” sighed Miss Izabela, looking at the sky, here and there dotted with white clouds.

“Where does your ladyship want us to go?” asked the footman, slamming the carriage door shut.

“To Wokulski’s shop,” Miss Izabela replied with nervous haste.

The footman jumped onto the box and the fat bay horses broke into a solemn trot, snorting and tossing their heads.

- Why, Belciu, to Wokulski? - asked Miss Florentyna, a little surprised.

— I want to buy myself some Parisian gloves, a few bottles of perfume…

— We'll get the same thing elsewhere.

“I want to go there,” Miss Isabella replied dryly.

For several days she had been tormented by a peculiar restlessness which she had experienced once before in her life. While abroad, years ago, in an acclimatization garden, She saw a huge tiger in one of the cages, sleeping, leaning against the bars in such a way that part of its head and one ear were sticking out.

Seeing this, Miss Isabella felt an irresistible desire to grab the tiger by the ear. The smell of the cage filled her with disgust, the animal's powerful paws with indescribable fear, but despite this she felt that she had to at least touch the tiger on the ear.

This strange attraction seemed dangerous and even ridiculous to her. So she overcame herself and went on; but after a few minutes she returned. She went back again, looked through other cages, tried to think of something else. In vain. She returned, and although the tiger was no longer sleeping, only purring and licking his terrible paws, Miss Isabel ran to the cage, put her hand in, and—trembling and pale—touched the tiger's ear.

A moment later she was ashamed of her madness, but at the same time she felt that bitter satisfaction known to people who listen to the voice of instinct in an important matter.

Today a similar desire arose within her.

She despised Wokulski, her heart sank at the mere thought that this man might have paid more for the silverware than it was worth, and yet she felt an irresistible urge—to enter the shop, look Wokulski in the eye, and pay him for a few trinkets with the very money that had come from him. Fear seized her at the thought of the meeting, but an inexplicable instinct pushed her forward.

On Krakowski Street she saw a sign from a distance saying: J. Mincel i S. Wokulski, and one house closer a new, not yet finished shop about five windows in the front, with mirrored panes. Of the several craftsmen and workers working on it, some were wiping the panes from the inside, others were gilding and painting the doors and door frames, and still others were fixing huge brass barriers in front of the windows.

"What kind of shop are they building?" she asked Miss Florentyna.

— Probably for Wokulski, because I heard that he took a larger premises.

“This shop is for me!” thought Miss Izabela, tugging at her gloves.

The carriage stopped, the footman jumped down from the box and helped the ladies alight. But when he then opened the door to Wokulski's shop with a bang, Miss Izabela was so weak that her legs wavered beneath her.For a moment she wanted to go back to the carriage and get away from there; but she soon regained control of herself and went in with her head held high.

Mr. Rzecki was already standing in the middle of the shop, rubbing his hands and greeting her with low bows. In the background, Mr. Lisiecki, combing his beautiful beard, with round and dignified movements presented brown chandeliers to a lady sitting on a chair. The miserable Klejn was selecting walking sticks for a young man who, at the sight of Miss Izabela, quickly armed himself with pince-nez — and smelling of heliotrope Mraczewski glared and jabbed his mustache at two rosy-cheeked girls who were accompanying the lady and looking at the toilet trinkets.

To the right of the door, behind the office, Wokulski sat bent over his bills.

When Miss Izabela entered, the young man who was looking at the chicks adjusted his collar, the two young ladies looked at each other, Mr. Lisiecki stopped halfway through his round phrase about the style of the chandeliers, but he kept his round pose, and even the lady listening to his lecture turned heavily in her chair. For a moment the shop was silent, which was only broken by Miss Izabela, speaking in a beautiful contralto:

— Have we found Mr. Mraczewski?…

— Mr. Mraczewski!… — Mr. Ignacy interjected.

Mraczewski was already standing next to Miss Izabela, flushed like a cherry, smelling like a censer, with his head bowed like a tuft of water reed.

— We came to ask you for gloves.

“Number five and a half,” replied Mraczewski, and he was already holding the box, which was shaking slightly in his hands under the influence of Miss Izabela’s gaze.

- Well, no... - interrupted the girl with a laugh. - Five and three quarters... You've already forgotten!...

"Madam, there are things one never forgets. However, if you command five and three quarters, I will serve in the hope that you will soon grace us with your presence again. Because the five and three quarter gloves," he added with a slight sigh, pushing several other boxes at her, "will definitely slip off your hands..."

“Genius!” Mr. Ignacy whispered quietly, winking at Lisiecki, who moved his lips contemptuously.

The lady sitting on the chair turned to the chandeliers, the two girls to the olive-wood dressing table, the young man in pince-nez began to choose walking sticks again and — things in the shop returned to a quiet mode. Only the feverish Mraczewski jumped down and ran up the ladder, pulled out drawers and pulled out more and more boxes, explaining to Miss Izabela in Polish and French that she could not wear any other gloves, only five and a half, nor use any other perfume, only Atkinson's original nor decorate your table with any other trinkets than those from Paris.

Wokulski leaned over the counter so much that the veins in his forehead bulged, and he kept calculating in his mind:

"29 and 36 are 65, and 15 are 80, and 73 are... then..."

Here he stopped and glanced out of the corner of his eye at Miss Izabela, who was talking to Mraczewski. They were both turned to him in profile; so he noticed the clerk's burning gaze riveted on Miss Izabela, to which she responded demonstratively with a smile and glances of gentle encouragement.

"29 and 36 — that's 65, and 15..." Wokulski counted in his mind, but suddenly the pen flew out of his hand. Without raising his head, he took a new nib out of the drawer, and at the same time, for some unknown reason, a question fell out of his calculation:

"And I'm supposed to love her?... Nonsense! I suffered from some brain disease for a year, and it seemed to me that I was in love... 29-36... 29-36... I never thought that I could be so indifferent to her... The way she looks at that donkey... Well, she's clearly a person who flirts even with shop assistants, and doesn't she do the same with carters and footmen!... For the first time I feel peace... oh God... And I wanted it so much..."

A few more people entered the store, and Mraczewski reluctantly addressed them as he slowly tied up the packages.

Miss Izabela approached Wokulski and, pointing her umbrella at him, said emphatically:

- Flora, be so kind as to pay this gentleman. We're going home.

- The cash register is here - said Rzecki, running up to Miss Florentyna. He took the money from her and they both retreated into the store.

Miss Izabela slowly moved up to the desk behind which Wokulski was sitting. She was very pale. It seemed that the sight of this man had a magnetic effect on her. .

— Am I speaking to Mr. Wokulski?

Wokulski rose from his chair and replied indifferently:

— I am at your service.

“But you were the one who bought our set and silverware?” she said in a choking voice.

— Yes, madam.

Now Miss Izabela hesitated. After a moment, however, a faint blush returned to her face. She continued:

— I presume you will sell these items?

— I bought them for that purpose.

Miss Isabella's blush intensified.

“Does the future buyer live in Warsaw?” she asked further.

"I won't sell these things here, but abroad. There... they'll give me a higher price," he added, noticing the question in her eyes.

— Do you expect to gain a lot?

— Therefore, in order to gain profit, I bought it.

"Is that why my father doesn't know that the silver is in your hands?" she said ironically.

Wokulski's lips twitched.

— I bought the service and silverware from a jeweler. I don't keep it a secret. I don't involve third parties in the matter, because it's not in the customs of trade.

Despite such harsh answers, Miss Izabela took a breath. Even her eyes darkened a bit and lost their gleam of hatred.

— And if my father changed his mind and wanted to buy these items back, for what price would you sell them now?

— For what I bought it. That is, with the addition of a percentage of… six… to eight per hundred per year…

- And you would give up the expected profit? ... Why is that? ... - she interrupted him hastily.

— Because, madam, trade is based not on expected profits, but on the constant turnover of cash.

"Goodbye, sir, and... thank you for the explanations," said Miss Izabela, seeing that her companion was already finishing her calculations.

Wokulski bowed and sat down to his book again.

When the servant had taken the parcels and the ladies had taken their seats in the carriage, Miss Florentyna spoke in a reproachful tone:

— Have you spoken to this man, Belu?…

— Yes, and I don't regret it. He lied about everything, but…

— What does this mean: but ?… — asked Miss Florentyna anxiously.

— Don't ask me... Don't say anything to me if you don't want me to burst into tears in the street...

And after a while she added in French:

— Well, maybe I did wrong coming here, but… I don’t care!…

"I think, Belciu," said her companion, pursing her lips seriously, "that you should talk about this with your father or your aunt."

"Do you mean," interrupted Miss Isabella, "that I must speak to the marshal or the baron? There will always be time for that; I have not the courage to do so today."

The conversation ended. The ladies returned home in silence; Miss Izabela had been irritated all day.

After Miss Izabela had left the shop, Wokulski went back to his calculations and added up two large columns of figures without a mistake. Halfway through the third, he stopped and marveled at the peace that had taken hold of his soul. After a year of fever and longing interrupted by outbursts of rage, where had this indifference come from? If a man could be suddenly thrown from a ballroom into the forest or from a stuffy prison into a cold and spacious field, he would not have experienced any other sensations or deeper amazement.

"Apparently I had been partially deranged for a year," Wokulski thought. "There was no danger, no sacrifice I wouldn't make for that person, and as soon as I saw her, I didn't care about anything anymore...

And how she talked to me. How much contempt there was for the worthless merchant… "Pay this gentleman!..." These great ladies are parade; a loafer, a gambler, even a thief, as long as he has a name, is good company for them, even if in face he resembles his mother's lackey instead of a father. But a merchant is a pariah … What do I care, rot in peace!”

He added one column again without even noticing what was happening in the store.

"How does she know," he thought further, "that I bought the set and the silverware? ... And how she probed, what he hadn't paid more for than it was worth! I would gladly give them this little souvenir. I owe her eternal gratitude, because if it weren't for my madness for her, I wouldn't have made a fortune and would have rotted away behind the counter. And now maybe I'll be sad without these regrets, despair and hopes ... Stupid life! ... We chase the phantom that everyone carries in their own heart on earth, and only when it escapes from there do we know that it was madness ... Well, I would never have thought that such miraculous cures could exist. An hour ago I was full of poison, and now I am so calm and - somehow empty, as if my soul and entrails had fled from me, and only my skin and clothes remained. What will I do now? What will I live on? ...I think I'll go to the exhibition in Paris and then to the Alps…”

At that moment Rzecki approached him on tiptoe and whispered:

— This Mraczewski is delicious, isn't he? How he knows how to talk to women!

“Like a hairdresser who has been emboldened,” replied Wokulski without taking his eyes off the book.

“Our clients made him like that,” the old clerk replied, but seeing that he was disturbing the principal, he stepped back. Wokulski fell into thought again. He glanced slightly at Mraczewski and only then noticed that the young man had something special in his physiognomy.

“Yes,” he thought, “he is shamelessly stupid, and that is probably why women like him.”

He wanted to laugh both at the glances Miss Izabela sent at the handsome young man and at his own delusions, which had so suddenly abandoned him today.

Suddenly he started; he heard Miss Isabel's name and noticed that there were no guests in the shop.

- Well, today you didn't hide your love affairs - Klejn said to Mraczewski with a sad smile.

"But how she looked at me, oh!..." Mraczewski sighed, placing one hand on his chest and twirling his mustache with the other. "I'm sure," he said, "that in a few days I'll receive a fragrant note. Then, the first rendezvous, then: "for you I'm breaking the rules I was brought up in," and then: "don't you despise me?" The moment before is very delightful, but the moment after is so embarrassed..."

- What are you blabbering about! - Lisiecki interrupted him. - We know your conquests. : they are called Matildas, whom you impress with a portion of roast beef and a mug of beer.

— Matildas are for everyday, ladies for holidays. But Iza will be the biggest holiday. I give you my word of honor that I don't know a woman who would make such a hellish impression on me... Well, because she's drawn to me too!

The door slammed and a grizzled gentleman entered the shop; he demanded the keychain. ​​to the watch, and he shouted and banged his stick as hard as if he was going to buy all the Japanese goods.

Wokulski listened to Mraczewski's boasting without moving. He experienced the impression as if weights were falling on his head and chest.

“In the end, I don’t care,” he whispered.

After the grizzled gentleman, a lady entered the shop asking for an umbrella, then a middle-aged man wanting to buy a hat, then a young man asking for a cigar case, and finally three young ladies, one of whom asked for Szolc's gloves. but necessarily Szolca, because he does not use any others.

Wokulski folded the book, slowly rose from the armchair, and reaching for his hat standing on the desk, he headed for the door. He felt short of breath and as if his skull was bursting.

Mr. Ignacy blocked his way.

- Are you going out? ... Maybe you should check out that store over there, he said.

"I'm not going anywhere, I'm tired," replied Wokulski without looking him in the eye.

When he left, Lisiecki tapped Rzecki on the arm.

“The old man seems to be starting to do something with his sides,” he whispered.

- Well - replied Mr. Ignacy - putting into operation such a business as the Moscow one is no small feat. Obviously.

— Why is he getting involved in this?

“So that he could raise our salaries,” Mr. Ignacy replied sternly.

- Let him start a hundred new businesses, even in Irkutsk, as long as he raises it every year - said Lisiecki. - I won't argue with him about that. But by the way, I think he's changed like hell, especially today.The Jews, sir, the Jews, he added, when they get wind of his project, they’ll beat him up.

— What's up Jews...

- Jews, I say, Jews!... They keep everyone by the head and won't let any Wokulski, not a Jew or even a mech, mess with them. .

- Wokulski will associate himself with the nobility - replied Ignacy - and there is capital there too.

"Who knows what's worse: a Jew or a nobleman?" Klejn interjected casually, raising his eyebrows in a very pathetic manner.

VIII. Meditations
Once on the street, Wokulski stood on the sidewalk, as if wondering where to go. Nothing pulled him in any direction. Only when he happened to look to the right, at his newly finished shop, in front of which people were already stopping, did he turn in disgust and go left.

“It's strange how little I care about all this,” he said to himself. Then he thought about the dozen or so people he already had jobs for, and the dozens who were to get jobs from him from May 1st, and the hundreds for whom he was to create new sources of work within the year, and the thousands who could improve their miserable existence thanks to his cheap goods—and—he felt that all these people and their families were of no interest to him at the moment.

“I’ll give up the store, I won’t establish a partnership, and I’ll go abroad,” he thought.

“And what will you disappoint the people who placed their hope in you?”

"Disappointment? ... Or have I not myself been disappointed? ...

As he walked, Wokulski felt some discomfort; but only after thinking it over did he decide that he was tired of constantly having to give way; so he crossed to the other side of the street, where there was less traffic.

“And yet this Mraczewski is an infamis ! — he thought. — How can one say such things in a shop? "In a few days I'll get a ticket, and then — a rendezvous! ... Ha, it's her own fault, there's no need to flirt with clowns ... Besides — it's all the same to me."

He felt a strange emptiness in his soul, and at its very bottom something like a drop of burning bitterness. No strength, no desires, nothing, just that drop so small that it could not be seen, and so bitter that the whole world could be poisoned with it.

“Momentary apathy, exhaustion, lack of impressions… I think too much about business,” he said.

He stopped and watched. The day before Christmas and the nice weather had lured a lot of people onto the city pavement. A line of carriages and a motley swaying crowd between Copernicus and Zygmunt looked like a flock of birds that were at that very moment hovering over the city, heading north.

"A peculiar thing," he said. "Every bird in the sky and every man on earth imagines that he is going where he wants. And only someone standing on the side sees that they are all being pushed forward together by some fatal current, stronger than their predictions and desires. Perhaps even the same one that carries the trail of sparks blown out by the locomotive during the night? ... They shine for the twinkling of an eye, to fade for all eternity, and that is called life.

Human generations pass by
Like waves when the wind stirs the sea;
And there are no festivals of their memory,
And you have no pain in remembering them. 
Where did I read that?… Whatever.”

The constant clatter and murmur seemed unbearable to Wokulski, and the inner emptiness was terrible. He wanted to do something and remembered that one of the foreign capitalists had asked him for his opinion on the issue of the Vistula boulevards. He had already formed an opinion: Warsaw weighs down with all its vastness and slides towards the Vistula. If the river bank were fortified with boulevards, the most beautiful part of the city would arise there: buildings, shops, avenues…

"We have to see what it would look like?" Wokulski whispered and turned onto Karowa Street. .

At the gate leading there he saw a barefoot porter, tied with ropes, drinking water straight from the fountain; he was splashed from head to toe, but he had a very satisfied face and smiling eyes.

"He already has what he wanted. I, as soon as I approached the source, saw that not only had it disappeared, but my desires were drying up. In spite of this, they envy me and demand pity for him. What a monstrous misunderstanding!"

On Karowa he took a breath. It seemed to him that he was one of the chaff that had already been thrown away by the mill of big-city life, and that it was slowly flowing somewhere down that gutter, clenched by the age-old walls.

"What about the boulevards?..." he thought. "They will stand for some time, and then they will fall apart, overgrown with weeds and shabby, like these walls. The people who built them with great labor also had health, safety, wealth, and perhaps fun and caresses in mind. And where are they?... They left behind cracked walls, like the shell of a snail from a bygone era. And the whole benefit of this pile of bricks and a thousand other piles will be that a future geologist will call them rocks of human manufacture, just as we today call coral reefs or chalk rocks of protozoa manufacture.

And what does a man gain from his toil?…
And of the works which he began under the sun?…
Insignificance is the messenger of his works,
And his life is but a twinkling of an eyelid.
Where have I read that, where?… Never mind.”

He stopped halfway down the road and looked at the district stretching at his feet between Nowy Zjazd and Tamka. He was struck by its resemblance to a ladder, one side of which was Dobra Street, the other — the line from Garbarska to Topiela, and a dozen or so cross streets formed as if rungs.

"We won't get anywhere with this lying ladder," he thought. "This is a sick corner, a wild corner."

And he considered full of bitterness that this patch of land by the river, covered with garbage from the entire city, would not produce anything but bungalows and one-story houses of chocolate and light yellow, dark green and orange. Nothing, except white and black fences surrounding empty lots, from where a multi-story tenement house would jump out here and there like a pine tree that had survived a cut-down forest, frightened by its own loneliness.

"Nothing, nothing!..." he repeated, wandering through the streets, where one could see ruins sunk below the pavement, with roofs overgrown with moss, premises with shutters bolted day and night, doors nailed shut, walls leaning back and forth, windows patched with paper or stuffed with rags. He walked, peered into apartments through dirty panes and was sated with the sight of wardrobes without doors, chairs with three legs, sofas with torn seats, clocks with one hand and smashed faces.

He walked along and laughed quietly at the sight of day laborers eternally waiting for work, craftsmen who occupied themselves only with patching old clothes, vendors whose only wealth was a basket of dry cookies - at the sight of ragged men, miserable children and extremely dirty women.

"Here is a miniature of a country," he thought, "in which everything tends to degrade and exterminate the race. Some perish from want, others from debauchery. Work takes money from its mouths to feed the weak; charity breeds impudent idlers, and poverty, unable to afford furniture, surrounds itself with perpetually hungry children, whose greatest advantage is an early death."

Here, an individual with initiative cannot cope, because everything conspires to bind him and use him up in an empty struggle – for nothing.”

Then his own story came to mind in great outline. When, as a child, he was hungry for knowledge, he was sent to a shop with a restaurant. When he killed himself working nights as a salesman, everyone mocked him, starting with the kitchen boys and ending with the intellectuals who got drunk in the shop. When he finally got to university, he was persecuted with the portions he had recently served to guests.

He finally found his peace in Siberia. There he was able to work, there he gained the recognition and friendship of the Czerskis. , Czekanowskis , Dybowski He returned to the country almost a scholar, but when he tried to find employment in this field, he was shouted down and sent back to trade…

“It's such a beautiful piece of bread in such hard times!”

So he returned to trading, and then they called him out for selling out and living at the mercy of his wife, from the Mincls' work.

As luck would have it, after a few years his wife died, leaving him a considerable fortune. After burying her, Wokulski moved away from the shop a bit and approached the books again.And perhaps from a haberdashery merchant he would have become a learned naturalist if, having found himself once in the theatre, he had not seen Miss Isabella.

She was sitting in a box with her father and Miss Florentyna, dressed in a white dress. She wasn't looking at the stage, which was currently the focus of everyone's attention, but somewhere in front of her, who knew where or at what. Maybe she was thinking about Apollo?…

Wokulski was looking at her the whole time.

She made a special impression on him. It seemed to him that he had seen her before and that he knew her well. He looked more closely into her dreamy eyes and from nowhere he remembered the immense peace of the Siberian deserts, where it is sometimes so quiet that you can almost hear the rustle of spirits returning to the west. Only later did it occur to him that he had never seen her anywhere, but that there was something about him as if he had been waiting for her for a long time.

"Is that you or not you?..." he asked himself, unable to take his eyes off her.

From then on he remembered little of the shop or of his books, but constantly sought opportunities to see Miss Isabella at the theatre, at concerts or at lectures. He would not call his feelings love, and he was not at all certain that there was an appropriate word in human language to express them. He only felt that she had become some mystical point at which all his memories, desires and hopes converged, a focus without which life would have no style or even meaning. Service in the grocery store, university, Siberia, marrying Mincel's widow, and finally involuntarily going to the theatre when he had no desire at all - all these were paths and stages along which fate led him to see Miss Isabella.

From that moment on, time had two phases for him. When he looked at Miss Isabella, he felt absolutely calm and somehow larger; without seeing, he thought about her and missed her.Sometimes it seemed to him that there was some mistake in his feelings and that Miss Isabella was not the center of his soul, but an ordinary, perhaps even very common, marriageable young lady. And then a strange project would come to his mind:

"I will get to know her and ask her directly: are you what I have been waiting for all my life? ... If you are not, I will leave without any complaints or regrets ... "

A moment later he saw that this project betrayed a mental deviation. So he put aside the question of what it was and what it wasn't, and decided, at any rate, to get acquainted with Miss Izabela.

Then he realized that among his acquaintances there was no man who could introduce him to the Łęckis' house. What was worse: Mr. Łęcki and the young lady were customers of his shop, but such a relationship, instead of facilitating, rather hindered the acquaintance.

Gradually, he formulated the conditions for getting to know Miss Izabela. In order for him to be able to do nothing more than speak honestly with her, it was necessary:

Not be a merchant or be a very rich merchant.

Be at least a nobleman and have connections in aristocratic circles.

Above all, have plenty of money.

Identifying oneself as a nobility was not a difficult thing.

In May last year, Wokulski took up this matter, which was accelerated by his trip to Bulgaria, as he already had his diploma in December. , it was much more difficult to get wealthy; however, fate helped him in this respect.

At the beginning of the eastern war A wealthy Moscow merchant, Suzin, a friend of Wokulski from Siberia, was passing through Warsaw. He visited Wokulski and urged him to take part in supplies for the army.

—Collect as much money as you can, Stanisław Piotrowicz — he said — and honestly, you will make a round million!…

Then in a hushed voice he explained his plans to him.

Wokulski listened to his projects. He did not want to participate in the execution of some, he accepted others, but hesitated. He was sorry to leave the city, where at least he saw Miss Izabela. But when in June she left for his aunt, and Suzin began to urge him with telegrams, Wokulski made up his mind and collected all the cash from his wife, in the amount of rs thirty thousand, which the deceased kept untouched in the bank.

A few days before leaving, he visited a doctor he knew, Szuman, whom they saw infrequently, despite their mutual kindness. The doctor, a Jew, an old bachelor, yellow, short, with a black beard, had a reputation for being an oddball. Having a fortune, he treated people for free and only to the extent that he needed it for his ethnographic studies. ; and to his friends he gave one prescription once and for all:

“Use everything from the smallest dose of oil to the largest dose of strychnine, and something of it will help you, even against glanders.”

When Wokulski called the doctor at his home, he was busy classifying the hair of various individuals of Slavic, Germanic and Semitic races and using a microscope, he was measuring the longer and shorter diameters of their cross-sections.

- Oh, are you there?... - he said to Wokulski, turning his head. - Put on a pipe if you want, and lie down on the couch if you can fit.

The guest lit a pipe and lay down as he was told, the doctor did his job. For some time they were both silent, then Wokulski spoke:

— Tell me: does medicine know of a state of mind in which a person feels that his previously scattered knowledge and... feelings have merged into one organism?

— Yes. With constant mental work and good nutrition, new cells can be created in the brain or old ones can associate with each other. And then from various departments the brain and various fields of knowledge form one whole.

— And what does this state of mind mean in which a person becomes indifferent to death, but begins to long for legends of eternal life?…

"Indifference to death," replied the doctor, "is a feature of mature minds, and the desire for eternal life is a harbinger of approaching old age."

They fell silent again. The guest was smoking a pipe, the host was hovering over the microscope.

— Do you think, — asked Wokulski, — that one can… love a woman ideally without desiring her?

— Naturally. It is one of the masks in which the instinct of species perpetuation likes to disguise itself.

- Instinct - species - instinct to perpetuate something and - perpetuation of the species! ... - repeated Wokulski. - Three words, and four nonsense.

"Make a sixth," replied the doctor without taking his eye from the glass, "and get married."

- Sixth?... - said Wokulski, rising on the couch. - And where's the fifth?

— You've already done the fifth: you've fallen in love.

— Me?… At my age?…

“Forty-five years is the era of the last love, the worst,” replied the doctor.

— Experts say that first love is the worst, Wokulski whispered.

— Not true. After the first, a hundred others await you, but after the hundredth, nothing. Get married; it is the only salvation for your illness.

— Why didn't you get married?

"Because my fiancée died," the doctor replied, leaning back in his chair and looking at the ceiling.So I did what I could: I poisoned myself with chloroform. It was in the province. But God sent a good friend who blew up the door and saved me. The basest kind of mercy!... I paid for the broken door, and the friend inherited my practice, declaring me crazy...

He returned to the hair and the microscope again.

— And what moral sense does this make for the last love? — asked Wokulski.

“That suicides should not be interrupted,” replied the doctor.

Wokulski lay there for another fifteen minutes, then he got up, put his pipe in the corner, leaned over the doctor and kissed him.

— Stay healthy, Michael.

The doctor jumped up from the table.

- Yeah?…

— I'm leaving for Bulgaria

- What for?

— I'll become a military supplier. I must make a fortune!… — replied Wokulski.

- Or?…

— Or... I won't come back.

The doctor looked him in the eye and squeezed his hand tightly.

— Sit on the ground on the levis — he said calmly. He walked him to the door and went back to work.

Wokulski was already on the stairs when the doctor ran after him and shouted, leaning over the railing:

- But if you do come back, don't forget to bring me hair: Bulgarian, Turkish, and so on, from both sexes. Just remember: in separate packages with notes. You know how to do that...

…Wokulski awoke from these old memories.

There is no doctor or his apartment, and he hasn't even seen them for ten months.Here is the muddy Radna Street, there Browarna. Up above, yellow university buildings peek out from behind the bare trees; down below, single-story houses, empty lots, and fences, and below that — the Vistula.

Next to him stood a man in a faded coat with a reddish beard. He took off his cap and kissed Wokulski's hand. Wokulski looked at him more closely.

- Vysotsky? ... - he said. - What are you doing here?

“We live here, my lord, in this house,” replied the man, pointing to a low mud hut.

— Why don't you come for transport? ? Wokulski asked.

— How will I come, sir, since my horse died on New Year's Day?

— What are you doing?

— And just like that — nothing together. We wintered with my brother, who is a trackman on the Vienna Railway. But he is also in trouble, because he is from Skierniewice. moved to Częstochowa. In Skierniewice he has three acres and he lived like a rich man, but today he is also poor, and the land is wasting away without supervision.

— Well, what about you now?

— The woman does some washing, but for those who don't really have anything to pay with, and I — just like that...We are wasting away, sir... not the first and not the last. Even as long as Lent is over, a man is strengthened by saying : today you fast for the souls of the dead, tomorrow in remembrance that Christ the Lord did not eat anything, the day after tomorrow, with the intention that God would change the evil. And after the holidays there will be no way to even explain to the children why they do not eat…

But does the Lord look a little gloomy? It seems the time has come when all must perish, sighed the poor man.

Wokulski fell into thought.

“Has your rent been paid?” he asked.

- There's no point in even paying, sir, because they'll throw us out anyway.

— And why didn't you come to the shop, to Mr. Rzecki? — asked Wokulski.

- I didn't dare, sir. The horse was gone, the cart was with the Jew, the jacket fitted me like an old man's... What was the point of coming and bothering people even more?...

Wokulski pulled out his purse.

"Here," he said, "are ten rubles for Christmas. Tomorrow at noon, come to the shop and get a coupon for Prague. There, you can choose a horse from the dealer, and after Christmas, come to work. With me, you can earn about three rubles a day, so you'll pay off the debt easily. Besides, you'll manage."

When the poor man touched the money, he began to shake.