Adam Mickiewicz
Mr. Thaddeus
or the last foray in Lithuania
Book One
Farm
The Return of the Master — Meeting First in the Room, the Second at the Table — The Judge's Important Lesson on Politeness — The Chamberlain's Political Remarks on Fashions — The Beginning of the Controversy over Kusy and Sokół — The Complaints of the Soldier — The Last Ushers of the Tribunal — A Glance at the Political State of Lithuania and Europe at that Time

Lithuania! My homeland! You are like health:
How much you should be valued, only he will know,
Who lost you. Today your beauty in all its glory
I see and describe because I miss you. 
Holy Virgin, who defends Bright Częstochowa
And you shine in Ostra Brama ! You, the castle stronghold
You protect Nowogródek and its faithful people!
How my child, you miraculously returned me to health
(When from a crying mother , under your care
Offered, I raised a dead eyelid;
And immediately I could walk to the threshold of Your temples
Go to thank God for the returned life),
Thus will you return us by a miracle to the bosom of our Homeland. 
Meanwhile, carry my longing soul
To these forest hills, to these green meadows,
Stretched wide above the blue Neman;
To those fields painted with various grains,
Gilded with wheat, silvered with rye;
Where is the amber scab? , buckwheat as white as snow,
Where the young woodpecker blushes maidenly stick,
And everything is girded as if with a ribbon, with brass
Green, on it rarely sit silent pear trees. 
Among such fields years ago, on the banks of a stream ,
On a small hill, in a birch grove,
There stood a nobleman's manor house, made of wood, but with a foundation;
The whitewashed walls shone from afar,
All the whiter because it is reflected from the dark green
The poplars that protect it from the autumn winds. 
The house is small but clean on all sides. ,
And he had a big barn and three stacks of it
Użtek , which cannot fit under the thatch.
It is obvious that the area is abundant in grain,
And it is obvious from the number of mounds , which is along and across the length of the streaks 
They shine as thickly as stars, as can be seen from the number of ploughs
Early ploughing of huge fallow fields ,
Black earth, probably belonging to the manor,
Well cultivated in the form of garden beds:
That in this house abundance and order reside.
The gate is still open to announce to passers-by,
That she is hospitable and invites everyone to be her guest. 
A young gentleman just arrived in a two-horse carriage
And having run around the courtyard, he returned to the porch.
He got out of the carriage; the horses were abandoned alone,
Pinching the grass, they slowly made their way to the gate.
The manor is empty because the porch door is closed.
The grafts were inserted with a pin and a peg.
The traveler to the farm did not run to ask the servants,
He opened the door and ran into the house, eager to greet him.
He hadn't seen his home for a long time, because it was in a far away city.
He was finishing his studies, he finally saw the end.
He runs in and eagerly glances at the ancient walls
He looks at them fondly, like his old friends.
He also sees the same equipment, the same upholstery,
With whom he liked to play since birth ,
But less great, less beautiful than they once seemed.
And there were also portraits hanging on the walls:
This is Kosciuszko in the czamarca Krakow, with eyes
Raised into the sky, he holds the sword in both hands;
Such was he when he swore on the altar steps,
That with this sword he will drive out three powerful men from Poland,
Or he will fall on it himself. Still in Polish attire
Rejtan is sitting , mourning the loss of freedom;
In her hand she holds a knife with the blade turned towards her womb,
And in front of him lies Phaedo and the life of Cato .
Next Jasinski , a handsome and gloomy young man;
Next to Korsak , his ever-present companion:
They stand on the ramparts Prague, at the stake of the Muscovites,
Slashing the enemy while Prague burns around them.
Even the old grandfather clock 
In the wooden wardrobe he recognized, at the entrance alcove ;
And with childish joy he pulled the string,
To hear old Dąbrowski's mazurka. 
He ran around the house looking for a room,
Where he lived as a child ten years ago.
He enters, steps back, rolls his astonished pupils
By the walls: this room is a woman's apartment!
Who would live here? The old uncle was not married;
And my aunt lived in St. Petersburg years ago.
It wasn't the housekeeper room? piano?
On it there were notes and books; everything was abandoned
Careless and disorderly: disorder is nice!
The hands that threw them were not old.
And then there's the white dress, fresh off the peg
For dressing, unbuttoned onto chair rails;
And on the windows there are pots with fragrant herbs,
Geranium, marigold , asters and violets.
The traveler stood at one of the windows — a new wonder:
In the orchard, on the bank once overgrown with nettles,
There was a tiny garden with paths ,
Full of bouquets of allspice and mint.
Wooden, small, number-linked fence 
It sparkled with ribbons of bright daisies;
The beds, you can see, were freshly watered,
There was a tin vessel full of water standing nearby,
But the gardener was nowhere to be seen;
Just what came out: the door is still swinging
Freshly rubbed, near the door you can see traces of legs
On the sand, without a shoe or stockings, she was;
On fine, dry, white sand as snow,
The trace is clear but light, you can guess that on the run
Quickly was left with tiny legs
From someone which barely touched the ground.
The traveler stood at the window for a long time, looking and thinking,
Breathing the fragrant breezes of flowers.
He tilted his face towards the violet bushes,
With curious eyes he chased along the roads
And again he stopped them on small tracks,
He thought about them and guessed whose they were.
He accidentally raised his eyes and was right on the fence
A young girl stood there… Her clothes were white
Her slender figure is only covered up to her chest,
Revealing her shoulders and swan neck.
A Lithuanian woman used to go there only in the morning,
She is never seen in such a way by men:
So even though she didn't have a witness, she folded her arms
On the chest, adding drapery to the dress.
The hair in the curl is not unraveled, but in small knots
Twisted, hidden in tiny white pods,
He decorated his head strangely, because it was bright from the sun.
It shone like a crown on a holy image.
The face was not visible; it was turned towards the field.
She was looking for someone with her eyes, far away, down below;
She saw it, laughed and clapped her hands,
Like a white bird she flew down from the fence onto the meadow ,
And she blew through the garden, through the fences, through the flowers,
And across the board leaning against the wall of the chamber…
Before he knew it, it flew in through the window, glowing,
Sudden, quiet and light, like the light of the moon.
Humming, she grabbed her dress and ran to the mirror:
Suddenly she saw the young man and the ball fell out of her hands.
The dress and her face turned pale with fear and wonder.
The traveler's face turned red,
Like a cloud when it meets the dawn with a wound .
The modest young man narrowed his eyes and covered them,
He wanted to say something, to apologize; he just bowed.
And he withdrew. The maiden cried out in pain,
Vaguely, like a child frightened in its sleep;
The traveler became frightened and looked, but she was already gone. 
He left feeling confused and felt his heart beating
Loudly, and he didn't know whether he was supposed to find it funny or not.
This is a strange meeting, should we be ashamed or happy? 
Meanwhile, the farmyard was not spared from attention,
That one of the new guests pulled up in front of the porch.
The horses have already been taken to the stable, they have already been given generously,
As in a good house, both fodder and hay:
Because the Judge never wanted, according to the new fashion,
Send the horses of Jewish guests to the inn.
The servants did not come out to greet you; but do not think at all,
So that in the house of the Judge was served carelessly:
The servants are waiting for Mr. Wojski to appear. will dress,
Who was now organizing a supper behind the house.
He replaces you and he, in his absence
Lord, he used to receive and entertain guests himself
(A distant relative of yours and friend of the house.) 
Seeing the guest, he went to the farm secretly,
Because he couldn't go out to meet in a weaver's powder ;
So he put on his Sunday clothes as quickly as he could.
Prepared in the morning, because he knew from the morning,
That he will be sitting at supper with a multitude of guests. 
Mr. Wojski recognized him from a distance, he spread his arms
And with a scream he hugged and kissed the traveler.
This quick, confused conversation began,
In which several years of history were wanted to be put into words
Short and tangled, in a series of novels, questions,
Exclamations and sighs and new greetings.
When Mr. Wojski had asked around enough and researched,
At the very end he told the story of that day. 
«Well done, my Tadeusz (for that was what he was called)
The young man who bore the Kościuszko title
In memory of being born during the war)
It's good that you have reconciled yourself today, my Tadeusz.
Home, just when we have many ladies.
Your uncle is thinking of throwing you a wedding soon;
There is plenty to choose from; we have a large group of people
For several days now, the border courts have been gathering,
To end the old dispute with the Count.
And Mr. Count is to come down to the manor tomorrow himself;
Chamberlain He has already arrived with his wife and daughters.
The youth went to the forest to play with guns,
And the old men and women watch the harvest
Near the forest they are probably waiting for the young people there.
We will go if you want and we will meet soon
"Uncle, Chamberlain and esteemed ladies."
Mr. Wojski and Tadeusz are walking along the road to the forest,
And they still can't talk as much as they want. 
The sun was reaching the last reaches of the sky,
It shone less strongly, but more widely than during the day,
All red, like a healthy face
The farmer, when he finished agricultural work
Returns to rest.Already a radiant circle
It descends to the top of the forest and already the misty darkness,
Filling the tops and branches of the tree,
It binds the entire forest into one and, as it were, merges it;
And the forest became black in the shape of a huge building,
The sun above him was red as a fire on the roof.
Suddenly it sank into the depths; still through the branches
It shone like a candle through the cracks in the shutters,
And it went out.And soon sickles ringing in groups
In the grain fields, and rakes sliding across the meadow,
They fell silent and stopped: that is what the Judge orders,
In his house the hosts finish their work during the day.
«The Lord of the Universe knows how long it is necessary to work;
The sun, His worker, when he descends from heaven,
It is time for the landowner to leave the field too." 
That's what Mr. Judge used to say, and the Judge prefers
She was a saint to the honest Bursar;
Because even the wagons that have already been assembled
A heap of rye, partly gone to the barn:
The oxen are delighted with their unusual lightness. 
The whole company was just returning from the forest,
Cheerful, but okay. Onward, little children
With the caretaker, then the Judge walked with the Chamberlain,
Next to him is Mr. Podkomorzy surrounded by his family;
The young ladies are right behind the older ones, and the young people are on the side;
The girls walked ahead of the youth by about half a step.
(That's what decency dictates.) No one was arguing there.
About order, no one arranged the men and ladies:
And everyone involuntarily maintained order;
Because the Judge kept the old customs at home,
And he never allowed any neglect
For age, birth, reason, office.
This order, he used to say, is what makes homes and nations famous,
With its fall, houses and nations perish.
So the housekeepers and servants got to order;
And a visiting guest, a relative or a stranger,
When he visited the Judge, after he had stayed a short time,
He adopted a custom that everything breathed. 
The Judge and his nephew's greetings were short:
He gave him his hand to kiss seriously,
And having kissed him on the temple, he greeted him politely;
And although he spoke little to him out of consideration for his guests,
It was visible from the tears that came out of his shirt 
He quickly wiped away how he loved Pan Tadeusz. 
In the footsteps of the farmer everything from the harvest and the forest,
Both from the meadows and from the pastures they returned to the manor house together.
Here a flock of sheep bleats and crowds the streets
And he raises a cloud of dust; he slowly walks on
A herd of Tyrolean heifers with brass bells;
There, neighing horses fly from the mown meadow:
Everything is running towards the well whose wooden arm
Once it creaks and the drink spills into the trough.
The judge, although tired, although surrounded by guests,
He did not miss an important economic duty:
He went to the well by himself. The best time was in the evening.
The farmer sees what condition the barn is in.
He will never entrust this supervision to his servants. ;
Because the Judge knows that the master's eye fattens the horse. 
Troops with Janitor Protazym with candles in the hallway
They stood and argued, somewhat at odds:
Because in the absence of the Military Janitor, he secretly
He ordered the tables with the supper to be taken out of the house,
And place it as soon as possible in the middle of the castle,
Which were visible ruins under the forest.
Why this transfer? Mr. Wojski grimaced
And he apologized to the Judge; the Judge was amazed,
But it happened: it is late and difficult to remedy,
He preferred to apologize to his guests and leave them alone.
On the way, the Janitor kept explaining to the Judge,
Why did he distort your device:
In the manor, none of the rooms is spacious
Sufficient for so many distinguished guests,
In the castle there is a large hall, still well preserved,
The vault is intact, although one wall is cracked,
The windows are without glass, but in summer it doesn't matter;
The proximity of the cellars is convenient for the servants .
He winked at the Judge as he spoke; it was obvious from his face,
That he had and concealed other, more important reasons.
Two thousand paces away the castle stood behind the house,
Imposing in structure, serious in size,
The legacy of the ancient Horeszko family;
The heir was killed during the national unrest.
All the goods destroyed by sequestration government,
The chaos of care, court decisions,
Part of it fell to distant relatives on the female side ,
And the rest was distributed among the creditors.
No one wanted to take the castle because it was in a noble class.
It was difficult to afford the cost of living;
But the Count, a close neighbor, when he left his care,
A rich young master, a distant relative of the Horeszkos,
Having come back from a trip he liked the walls,
Explaining that they are Gothic architecture;
Although the Judge was convinced of this in the documents,
That the architect was a master from Vilnius, not a Goth.
Suffice it to say that the Count wanted a castle.Exactly, and to the Judge
Suddenly this desire came, I don't know why.
They started the trial in the zemstvo, then in the main court,
In the senate, again in the zemstvo and the governor's government;
Finally, after many expenses and orders numerous,
The case returned to the border courts again. 
The Janitor was right in saying that in the castle hall
There will be enough space for a barrister , and guests are welcome.
The hall is as big as a refectory ​​, with a convex vault
On the pillars, the floor is covered with stone,
The walls are without any decorations, but the brickwork is clean;
There were deer and stag antlers sticking out all around.
With inscriptions of where and when the loot was obtained;
Right next to the fighters' coat of arms engraved with jewels,
And it stands, each one listed by name;
The Horeszko coat of arms, Półkozic, shone on the vault.
The guests entered in order and stood in a circle.
Chamberlain he took the highest seat at the table;
By age and office this honour belongs to him,
As he walked, he bowed to ladies, old men and young people.
A collector stood next to him. , The judge right next to the St. Bernard.
The Bernardine said a short prayer in Latin;
The men were given vodka; then they all sat down,
And the Holodeck The Lithuanians ate in silence and eagerly. 
Mr. Tadeusz, although a youngster, is a guest by right
He sat high up among the ladies next to the gentleman;
There was only one thing left between him and his uncle.
An empty space, as if waiting for someone.
My uncle often looked at this place and at the door,
As if he was sure of someone's coming and was demanding it.
And Tadeusz followed his uncle's gaze towards the door,
And with him in a desolate place he set his eyes.
Strange thing! the places around are the seats of virgins ,
On which he could look without shame like a princess,
All of noble birth, each young and pretty:
Tadeusz looks where no one is sitting.
This place is a riddle; young people like riddles;
Absent-minded, to his pretty neighbor
He had barely uttered a few words to the Podkomorzanka;
He doesn't change her plates, doesn't pour her a glass,
And he doesn't entertain the ladies with polite conversations,
From which the capital's education would be known;
This one empty space tempts and entices him,
No longer empty, for he filled them with thoughts.
There were thousands of guesses running around this place,
Like frogs in a lonely meadow after the rain;
Among them, one figure reigns supreme, as if in the weather
The lily of the lakes, its white temple rising above the water.
The third dish was served. Suddenly, Mr. Podkomorzy,
Having poured a drop of wine into Miss Rose's glass,
And he brought the cucumbers to the younger girl's plate,
He said: "I must serve you, my maiden daughters,
Even though he is old and clumsy." So he threw himself
Several young men served the table and the girls. 
The judge, looking at Tadeusz from the side,
And having slightly adjusted the edges of the kontusz,
He poured some Hungarian wine and said, "Today, as is a new custom,
We send young people to the capital for education;
And I do not deny that our sons and grandchildren
They have more book learning than the old ones;
But every day I see how young people suffer from this,
That there are no schools teaching how to live with people and the world.
In the past he used to go to the lord's courts a young nobleman;
I myself was a courtier to the Voivode for ten years,
Father Podkomorzy, the honorable lord
(While speaking, he squeezed the Chamberlain's knees);
He prepared me for public service with his advice,
He did not leave his care until he became a human being.
In my home his memory will be eternally dear,
Every day I pray to God for his soul.
If I didn't spend so much time at his court
Like others, when I return home I plow the land,
When others, more worthy of the Voivode's favor,
They then reached the highest national offices,
At least Tom benefited from having me in my house
No one will ever accuse me of wrongdoing.
In honesty, in politeness; and I will say it boldly,
Politeness is not an easy or small science.
Not easy, because it doesn't end there, like with your leg
To kick skillfully, to greet anyone with a smile;
Because such politeness is fashionable, it seems to me commercial,
But not old Polish, nor noble.
Politeness is common to all, but it is different for each person;
Because it is not without politeness and childish love,
And the husband's consideration for his wife in the presence of people, and the lord
For their servants, and in each there is a certain variety.
You have to study for a long time so as not to get lost
And everyone should to do honesty.
And the old people were learning; the gentlemen were talking,
It was a living national history,
And among the nobility the domestic history of the district.
This was used to let the nobleman's brother know,
That everyone knows about him, they don't take him lightly;
So the nobleman kept his customs under guard. 
Today do not ask a man: what is he born of? who gave birth to him?
Who did he live with? What did he do? Anyone can go anywhere they want,
As long as you're not a government spy and as long as you're not in poverty.
How Vespasianus didn't smell money 
And he didn't want to know where they came from, from what hands and countries,
They don't want to know a person's lineage or customs!
It's enough that it's valid and that you can see the stamp on it,
So they respect friends like the Jews respect money." 
Having said this, the Judge looked the guests over in order;
Because although he always spoke fluently and with reason,
He knew that the impatient youth of today,
That she is bored with something long, although most expressive.
But everyone listened in profound silence.
The Judge of the Chamberlain seemed to be able to advise himself with his eyes;
The Chamberlain did not interrupt the matter with his praise,
But he agreed frequently with nods of his head. 
The judge was silent, but he still consented with a nod;
So the Judge poured out his cup and his own,
And he continued: "Courtesy is no small thing:
When a person learns to weigh properly,
The second age, birth, virtues, customs,
Then he also recognizes his own importance:
As on scales, so that we may know our weight,
I need to put someone on the other side of the scale.
And it is worthy of your special attention.
The politeness which young people should show to the fair sex;
Especially when the nobility of the house and the bounty of fortune
They explain innate charms and qualities.
This is the path to affects and this is where it is associated
A great alliance of houses. That's what they thought old.
And so…» Here the Judge suddenly turns his head
He nodded at Tadeusz and gave him a stern look:
It was obvious that he was already coming to the conclusions of his speech.
Suddenly he tinkled his snuffbox. the golden Chamberlain,
And he said: "My Judge, in the past it was even worse!
Now, I don't know if fashion changes us old people,
Are the youth better, but I see less scandal.
Oh, I remember the times when to the homeland,
For the first time the French fashion has arrived!
When suddenly the young lordlings from foreign countries
They invaded us in a horde worse than the Nogais ,
Persecuting the faith of God and ancestors in the homeland,
Laws and customs, even old dresses.
It was sad to see the yellowed youngsters,
Talking through their noses, and often without noses,
Provided with brochures and various newspapers,
Preaching new faiths, laws, toilets .
This mob had great power over minds;
Because the Lord God, when he imposes punishment on a nation,
It takes away common sense from citizens.
And so, the wisest of them did not dare to resist the fools,
And the whole nation was afraid of them like the plague,
Because he already felt the seeds of disease within himself.
Fashionistas were shouted at and models were taken from them;
Faith, speech, laws and costumes were changed.
It was a masquerade, a carnival wantonness,
After which the Great Lent was soon to come — captivity!
I remember, even though I was just a little child then,
When to my father, in the Ashmyany district,
Mr. Podczaszyc arrived on a French cart,
The first man to speak French in Lithuania.
They all ran after him as if he were a falcon. ,
The house was envied for the doorstep of which
The Cup-bearer stood on a two-wheeled boat,
Which in French was called karyjulka:
Instead of servants, two dogs sat at the trowel,
And on the trestles Niemczysko is as thin as a board;
His legs were long and thin, like hop poles,
In stockings, shoes with silver buckles,
Wig with a hairband tied in a bellows.
The old ones on the equipage They burst out laughing,
And the peasants said goodbye, saying: that after the world
The Venetian devil rides in a German carriage.
It would take a long time to describe what the Podczaszyc himself was like;
It's enough that he seemed like a monkey or a parrot to us.
In a large wig, which to the golden fleece
He liked to compare, and we liked to compare.
If anyone felt at that time that Polish clothing
It is more beautiful than imitating foreign fashion,
He kept quiet because the youth would shout that he was disturbing him.
A culture that hinders progress, that betrays!
Such was the power of modern prejudices!
Podczaszyc announced that he would reform us,
It will civilize and constitute;
He announced to us that some Frenchmen had made a statement
They made an invention: that people are equal…
Although we talked about this in your letter a long time ago it was written to the Order ,
And every priest says the same thing from the pulpit.
The teaching was ancient, it was a matter of fulfilling it!
But there was such blindness at that time,
That the oldest things in the world were not believed,
If they haven't been read in a French newspaper. 
The cup-bearer, despite his equality, took the title of marquis;
It is known that the titles come from Paris,
At that time the title of marquis was in fashion there.
However, as fashions changed over the years,
The same marquis assumed the title of democrat;
Finally, with a different fashion, under Napoleon,
The democrat came from Paris a baron;
If he had lived longer, perhaps a new alternative ,
From baron he would one day become a democrat.
Because Paris prides itself on frequent changes of fashion;
And whatever a Frenchman comes up with, a Pole will like. 
Thank God that now, if our youth
She's going abroad, not for clothes,
Don't look for legislation in the printing shops
Or learn pronunciation in Parisian cafes.
Because now Napoleon, a wise and quick man,
It does not give time to seek fashion and conversation.
Now the weapons are thundering, and our old hearts are swelling,
That Poles are so loud in the world again;
There is fame, and therefore there will be a Republic!
Always from the laurels the tree of freedom blooms.
It's just sad that the years drag on for us so much
In idleness! and they are always so far away!
So long to wait! even such rare news —
Father Robak (he said quietly to the Bernardine),
I heard that you received a message from beyond the Niemen;
Perhaps you know something about our army?»
— "Nothing at all" Robak replied indifferently,
(It was obvious that he was reluctant to listen to the conversation)
«I am bored with politics; if from Warsaw
I have a letter, it's a monastic matter, it's our business
Bernardine: what is there to talk about at supper;
There are lay people here to whom none of this belongs."
Saying this, he looked askance. where among the revelers
There was a guest sitting there, a Muscovite; it was Captain Rykov,
An old soldier stood in a nearby village on his quarters,
The Judge, out of politeness, asked him to supper.
Rykov ate well and rarely engaged in conversation.
But at the mention of Warsaw, he raised his head and said:
"Mr. Podkomorzy! Oh, you! You are always curious
O Bonaparte, always to you there to Warsaw!
He! Homeland! I am not a spy, but I know Polish, —
Homeland! I feel it all, I understand!
You Poles, I Russians: I'm not fighting now,
There is an armistice , we eat and drink together.
Often on avanposts our guy is talking to a Frenchman,
He drinks vodka; when they shout Ura! — cannonade.
Russian proverb: I like the one I fight with;
Smooth the bridesmaid as if to the soul, and beat as if to the coat .
I say there will be a war here. To the Major
Pluta, the adjutant of the staff arrived yesterday:
Get ready to march! We'll go, whether to the Turk,
Or a Frenchman; oh, that Bonaparte figure!
Without Suwarow he might be the one to knock us out . 
In our regiment they talked about how they were going against the French,
That Bonaparte was conjuring : yes, and Suwarów
He charmed; so were charms against charms.
Once in battle, where was he? to look for Bonaparte,—
And he was transformed into a fox, and Suwarów into a greyhound;
So Bonaparte turns into a cat again,
Continue tearing with the claws, and Suwarów crouches down.
Look what happened to Bonaparte in the end…»
Here Rykov stopped and ate; suddenly, with the fourth dish
A servant entered and suddenly the side door opened.
A new person entered, handsome and young.
Her sudden appearance, her height and beauty,
Her attire attracted attention; everyone greeted her,
Apart from Tadeusz, it was obvious that everyone knew her.
Waist she had a slender, shapely, charming breast,
A material dress, pink, silk,
Bosom cut-out, lace collar, sleeves
Short; she was spinning a toy fan in her hand
(Because it wasn't hot); a gilded fan
As it waved, it poured out a heavy rain of sparks;
Hair head, hair curled into circles,
In curls, and interwoven with pink ribbons,
Among them a diamond, as if hidden from the eyes,
He shone like a star in a comet's tail:
In a word, formal attire; some whispered,
That it's too exquisite for the countryside and for everyday life.
The legs, even though the dress is short, cannot be seen by the eye,
Because she was running very fast, she was rather gliding
As people who celebrate the Three Kings' Day
They move the hidden boys in the nativity scene.
She ran and greeted everyone with a slight bow,
She wanted to sit in the spot she had left.:
It was difficult; because there were no chairs for the guests,
Four rows of them sat on four benches:
It was necessary to move a row or jump over a bench;
She was able to fit skillfully between two benches,
And then, between the row of seats and the table,
Like a billiard ball rolling around the wheel.
As she ran she touched close to our young man;
Having caught the ruffle on someone's knees,
She slipped a little and in her absent-mindedness
She leaned on Pan Tadeusz's arm.
After politely apologizing, she sat down in her seat.
Between him and his uncle, but she ate nothing;
She was just fanning herself, that's the handle of the fan
She was spinning, it was a collar made of Brabant lace 
She corrected it with a light touch of her hand
She touched the locks and bunches of blond ribbons of hair.
This break in conversation had been going on for about four minutes.
Meanwhile, at the end of the table , ahead quiet murmurs,
And then the half-loud conversations began;
The men judged their hunt for the day.
Assessor with Notary the stubbornness grew stronger
The argument over the short one is getting louder and louder greyhound,
Which Mr. Rejent was proud of having
And he claimed that he had caught the hare;
The assessor argued to the Regent's annoyance,
That glory belongs to the greyhound Sokołów.
The opinions of others were asked; so everyone around
They took the side of Kusy or Sokół,
Some are experts, some are eyewitnesses . 
The judge on the other end to the new neighbor
He said in a low voice: "Sorry, we had to sit down,
It is not right to put off the supper until later:
The guests, hungry, walked far into the field;
I thought you wouldn't be at the table with us today." 
Having said this, with the Chamberlain over a full glass
He talked about political matters in hushed tones.
While both sides of the table were busy,
Tadeusz looked at the unknown person.
He recalled that at the first glance at the place
He immediately guessed whose seat it was supposed to be.
He blushed, his heart was beating extraordinarily:
So he saw the solution of his secret conjectures!
So it was destined to be by his side
There sat the beauty seen in the darkness!
Although she seemed to be taller now,
Because she is dressed, and the clothes make her bigger and smaller.
And she had short, light gold hair,
And this raven's hair had long curls?
The color must have come from the sun's rays,
Which turns everything red at sunset.
He did not see the face then, it disappeared too quickly;
But the thought of a pretty face is usually able to guess:
He thought she probably had black eyes,
White face, lips red like twin cherries;
In this one he found similar eyes, lips, and faces.
Perhaps the biggest difference lies in age:
The gardener girl seemed small,
And this lady is a woman already mature in years;
But young people do not ask about beauty certificates,
For every woman is young to a young man,
Boyish every beauty seems to be equal ,
And to the innocent every lover is a virgin. 
Tadeusz, although he was almost twenty years old,
And from his childhood he lived in Vilnius, a big city,
He had a priest as his caretaker who looked after him.
And he brought them up in the ancient strictness of rules.
So Tadeusz brought it to his hometown
A pure soul, a lively mind and an innocent heart,
But together they have quite a desire for mischief.
He had already planned in advance that he would allow himself
To exercise in the countryside freedoms that have long been forbidden;
He knew he was handsome, he felt fresh, young,
And he inherited strength and health from his parents.
His name was Soplica: all the Soplicas
They are, as we know, robust, obese and strong,
Only those who are good at soldiering, and less diligent in their studies.
Tadeusz was not reborn from his ancestors:
He rode well on a horse and walked bravely,
He was not dull, but he made little progress in his studies,
Although my uncle spared nothing for my upbringing;
He preferred a shotgun shoot or use a saber.
He knew that they were planning to draft him into the army,
That the father had renounced such a wish in his will;
He constantly missed the drum while sitting at school.
But my uncle suddenly changed his first intentions,
He told him to come and get married.
And he took over the farm; he promised at the beginning
Give a small village and then all your property.
All these virtues and advantages of Tadeusz
They caught the eye of their neighbor, an attentive woman.
She measured his shapely and tall figure,
His arms are strong, his chest is broad,
And she looked into the face from which the blush was springing,
Whenever the young man met her eyes:
Because he had completely recovered from his initial fear,
And he looked with a bold gaze in which fire burned.
She also looked: and the four pupils
They burned against each other like rosary candles. 
She was the first to start a conversation with him in French.
He was coming back from the city, from school: so he asked for new books,
She asked Tadeusz about the authors of the sentence
And she drew questions from the sentences again.
Well, when she started talking about painting,
About music, about dances, even about sculpture,
She proved that she also knew the brush, the notes, and the prints;
Tadeusz was amazed at so much science!
He was afraid of becoming a target of ridicule,
And he stuttered like a student in front of a teacher.
Fortunately, the teacher is nice and not harsh;
The neighbor guessed the reason for his fear,
She started a discussion about less difficult and intelligent subjects,
About the boredom and troubles of rural life,
And how to have fun, and how to divide the time,
To make life more pleasant and the village cheer up.
Tadeusz answered more boldly, the matter went further,
In half an hour they were already familiar with each other;
They even started little jokes and arguments.
Finally, she placed three loaves of bread in front of him.
Three people to choose from; he took the one closest to himself;
The Chamberlains both frowned at this,
The neighbor laughed but didn't say anything.
Who did that happier knob represent? 
The fun was different at the other end of the table;
Because there, having suddenly increased, the supporters of Sokół
They attacked Kusy's party without mercy.
The dispute was great, they did not eat the last dishes;
While standing and drinking, both sides argued,
And Mr. Rejent was most furious:
Once he started, he continued his work without interruption,
And he painted it very clearly with his gestures.
(He was formerly a lawyer, Mr. Rejent Bolesta,
They called him a preacher because he was too fond of gestures.)
Now his hands were at his sides, his elbows bent back,
From under his arms he stuck out his fingers and long fingernails,
Introducing two greyhound leashes with this image:
He was just finishing the story. "Wyczha! we let it go together
Me and the Assessor, together, like two hens
One finger lowered from one double-barreled shotgun;
Wychha! they went, and the hare like a string, scurried into the field,
The dogs are here (he said this, stretching his hands along the table
And with his fingers he mimicked the movement of the greyhounds in a strange way)
The dogs were close by, and the hec had moved quite far from the forest;
The falcon is on the move; the dog is swift, but zealous,
He blew himself up in front of Kusy, just a finger's length away:
I knew he would miss. Szarak, a great player,
He ran straight into the field, followed by a pack of dogs;
The greyhound player! Since he smelled all the greyhounds in a pile
A twitch to the right, a little goat, with him to the right stupid dogs,
And he'll go left again, after he's done two jumps,
The dogs behind him run to the left: he into the forest, and my Kusy
Cap!» Thus shouting, Mr. Notary leaned on the table,
With his fingers he ran to the other side,
And "cap!" he screamed right next to Tadeusz's ear:
Tadeusz and the neighbor, with this outburst of voice
Suddenly scared right in the middle of the conversation,
They involuntarily pushed their heads away from each other,
As the vertices of the tree are related together
When the wind tears them apart; and the hands under the table
Lying close together, they suddenly ran away,
And the two faces blushed as one.
Tadeusz, so as not to betray his absent-mindedness:
"True," he said, "my Notary, undoubtedly true,
A short, beautiful greyhound in shape, if just as catchy…»
"Is he quick?" shouted Mr. Notary, "my favorite dog."
So that he wouldn't be catchy?…» So Tadeusz again
He was glad that such a beautiful dog had no vice,
He regretted that he had only seen it when coming out of the forest,
And that he did not have time to get to know his qualities.
At this the Assessor trembled and dropped the glass from his hands,
He gazed at Tadeusz like a basilisk.
The assessor was less loud and less active
From Rejent, slimmer and smaller in stature,
But terrible at the redoubt, ball and regional assembly,
For they said of him: He has a sting in his tongue;
He could compose such witty jokes,
So that they can be printed in the calendar,
All malicious, sharp. Formerly a prosperous man,
The legacy of his father and his brother's estate
He squandered everything on the great figurative world;
Now he has entered the service of the government to have a say in the district.
He was very fond of hunting, even just for fun,
Just the sound of the trumpet and the sight of the raid
It reminded him of his teenage years,
When he had numerous shooters and dogs called:
Now he has two greyhounds left from the entire kennel,
And yet one of these they wanted to deny glory!
So he approached and slowly stroked the favorites
He said with a smile, and it was a venomous smile:
«A greyhound without a tail is like a nobleman without office,
The tail also helps greyhounds a lot in their propulsion:
And you consider temptation to be proof of kindness?
Besides, we can rely on your aunt's judgment.
Although Mrs. Telimena lived in the capital
And he's been playing in our neighborhood recently,
He knows more about hunting than young hunters:
"That's how learning comes by itself with the years."
Tadeusz, on whom it fell unexpectedly
Thunder like this, he stood up confused, didn't say anything for a while,
But he looked at his rival more and more fearfully, more fiercely… 
Suddenly, with great luck, the Chamberlain sneezed twice
"Vivat!" they all shouted; he bowed to everyone.
And slowly he rang the snuffbox with his fingers.
Snuffbox made of gold, set with diamonds,
And inside it was a portrait of King Stanislaus.
The King himself gave it to the Chamberlain's father,
After his father, the Podkomorzy held it with dignity;
When he rang it, it was a sign that he was about to speak.
Everyone fell silent and did not dare to open their mouths.
He said: "Esteemed noblemen, my brothers and benefactors,
The only hunting forum are meadows and forests;
So I don't decide on such matters at home,
And I am resolving our meeting for tomorrow,
And I will not allow any further replies from either party today.
Janitor! Call off the case, go to the field tomorrow.
Tomorrow the Count will come here with all the hunting party,
And you will go with us, my neighbor Judge,
And Mrs. Telimena, and the ladies, and the ladies,
In a word, I will make a great hunt for the office;
And the Voyski will not refuse us company either".
So saying, he handed the snuffbox to the old man.
The soldier sat at the sharp end among the hunters,
He listened narrowing his eyes, he didn't say a word,
Although the youth often asked him for his opinion,
Because no one knew hunting better than he did.
He was silent, weighing a pinch from his snuffbox.
In his fingers and he pondered for a long time before he finally took it;
He sneezed so hard that the whole room echoed,
And shaking his head, he said with a bitter smile:
«Oh, how this saddens and surprises me, old man!
What would the old hunters say about it,
Seeing that there were so many noblemen, so many gentlemen in the company,
Are there going to be arguments about a greyhound's tail?
What would old Rejtan say to this if he came to life?
He would return to Lachowicze and lie in his grave!
What would the old voivode Niesiołowski say? ,
Who has the world's first hounds so far,
And two hundred shooters are holding it, as is the lord's custom,
And he has a hundred carts of nets in the Worończański castle,
And for so many years he has been sitting like a monk in his court,
No one can ask him to go hunting,
Białopiotrowicz he refused himself!
Because what would he catch on your hunts?
It would be a great fame if you were like that
As is today's fashion, he rode on grey horses!
In my time, sir, in the language of the shooter,
The wild boar, bear, elk, wolf, were called noble animals
And an animal that has no fangs, horns, or claws,
They were left for paid servants and courtiers;
No gentleman would ever want to accept
A shotgun that was disgraced by being filled with thin shot!
They did keep greyhounds, because when they returned from hunting,
It happens that a poor hare runs away from under the horse:
Then they would run a leash behind him for the toy.
And the little lords were chasing them on their horses
In front of the eyes of the parents who are pursuing this
They barely deigned to see, why argue about them!
So let His Excellency the Chamberlain deign
Revoke your orders and forgive me,
That I can't go on a hunt like that,
And never will my foot set on it!
My name is Hreczecha, from King Lech,
No one chased hares, Hreczecha». 
Here the laughter of the youth drowned out Wojski's speech.
They got up from the table, the Chamberlain was the first to move,
By age and office this honour belongs to him,
As he walked he bowed to ladies, old men and young people;
Behind him walked the collector, the Judge right next to the Bernard.
The judge at the threshold gave his hand to Podkomorzyna,
Tadeusz Telimena, Assessor of Krajczanka,
And Mr. Notary at the end of the Military Hreczeszance.
Tadeusz and a few guests went to the barn,
And he felt confused, angry and unhappy.
He thought about all the events of the day:
Meeting, having dinner at the neighbor's side;
And especially the word "auntie" next to his ear
It buzzed constantly like a bothersome fly.
He would like to ask the Janitor a better question.
About Lady Telimena, but he could not catch him;
He didn't see Wojski either, because he had just left the supper
Everyone followed the guests as servants should,
Arranging rooms for rest in the manor.
The elders and ladies slept in the manor house;
Youth Tadeusz was ordered to lead,
Instead of the farmer, in the hay barn. 
In half an hour the whole manor was silent
as after ringing the bell for prayers in a monastery;
The silence was broken only by the voice of the night watchman.
They all fell asleep. The judge himself does not close his eyes;
As the head of the household, he plans an expedition
He's going to organize a party in the field and at home next year.
He gave orders to the economists, mayors and rubber workers,
To the clerks, housekeepers, shooters and grooms
And he had to go through all the daily accounts.
Finally he told the Janitor that he wanted to take off his clothes. 
The janitor untied his belt, a Slutsk belt, a solid belt ,
Next to which thick cocks shine like putty,
On one side, asphodel with purple flowers,
On the reverse side black silk with silver plaid;
This belt can also be placed on both sides,
Gold for formal occasions, and black for mourning.
The Janitor himself was able to untie and fold this belt.;
That's what he hired himself for and he ended up talking like this:
«What is wrong with moving the tables to the castle?
No one lost anything from this, and you may gain something.
After all, this castle is the subject of a lawsuit today.
As of today, we have acquired the rights to the castle.
And despite all the hostility on the other side
I will prove that we took the castle into our possession.
After all, whoever invites guests to a castle for supper,
He proves that he has or takes property there;
We will even call opposing parties as witnesses:
I remember similar incidents in my time."
The Judge was already asleep. So the Janitor quietly entered the hall,
He sat down by the candle and took the book out of his pocket,
Which always serves him like a Golden Altar ,
Which he never throws away at home or when traveling.
It was a tribunal case file : there in a row
There were written records of cases that were before the office
The janitor himself called out with his voice many years ago,
Or which he managed to find out about later.
To ordinary people the court list seems like a list of names;
The usher is the outline of magnificent paintings.
So he read and thought: Ogiński with Wizgird,
Dominicans with Rymsza, Rymsza with Wysogird,
Radziwiłł with Wereszczaka, Giedroić with Rdułtowski,
Obuchowicz with the kahal, Juraha with Piotrowski,
Maleski with Mickiewicz, and finally the Count
With Soplica; and reading, from these names he draws
The memory of great events, all the trial events,
And before him stands the court, the parties and the witnesses;
And he looks at himself as if in a white żupan,
He stood in front of the tribunal in a navy blue kontusz,
One hand on the saber and the other to the table,
Having called to the two sides, "Be quiet!" he cries.
Dreaming and finishing the evening prayer, slowly
The last tribunal usher in Lithuania fell asleep. 
Such were the fun and games of those years
In the middle of a quiet Lithuanian village, when the rest of the world
She was drowning in tears and blood;when that man, the god of war,
Surrounded by a cloud of regiments, a thousand armed guns,
Harnessing to his chariot golden eagles alongside silver ones,
From the Libyan wilderness he flew to the Alps sky-high,
Casting thunderbolt upon thunderbolt, at the Pyramids, at Tabor,
In Marengo, in Ulm, in Austerlitz. Victory and Partition
They ran before him and after him. The fame of so many deeds,
Pregnant with the names of knights, from the Nile
It went roaring northwards, all the way to the banks of the Niemen
It bounced off the Moscow ranks as if from rocks,
Which defended Lithuania with iron walls
The news for Russia is as terrible as the plague. 
After all, sometimes news is like a stone from heaven
It fell into Lithuania.Sometimes an old man begging for bread,
Without a hand or a foot, having accepted alms,
He stopped and turned his eyes around cautiously.
When he didn't see any Russian soldiers in the manor
Neither skullcaps nor red collars,
At that time, he was what he professed: he was a legionnaire,
He brings old bones to his native land,
Which he could no longer defend… How did his whole
Your family, as his servants embraced him,
He was sitting at the table, crying loudly!
And he told stories stranger than fairy tales. 
He told the story as a general Dabrowski,
From the Italian land he tries to attract to Poland,
How he gathers his countrymen in the Lombard field;
How Kniaziewicz gives orders from the Capitol
And the winner, snatched from the descendants of the Caesars
He threw a hundred bloody banners into the eyes of the French. ,
Like Jablonowski He ran to where the pepper grows,
Where sugar is melted and where in eternal spring
Fragrant forests bloom; with the legion of the Danube
There the Negro leader rebukes the Negroes and sighs for his homeland.
The old man's speeches circulated secretly in the village;
The boy who heard them suddenly disappeared from the house,
He crept secretly through the forests and swamps,
Chased by the Muscovites, he ran to hide in the Niemen
And he swam like a diver to the shores of the Duchy of Warsaw,
Where he heard a pleasant voice: "Welcome, friend!"
But before he left, he jumped onto a hill of stone
And he said to the Muscovites across the Neman: "See you soon!"
This is how Gorecki, Pac and Obuchowicz sneaked in,
Piotrowski, Obolewski, Rożycki, Janowicz,
Mierzejewski, Brochocki and Bernatowicz,
Kupść, Gedymin and others I can't count:
They left their parents and their beloved land,
And the goods that are for the treasuryrski were taken away. 
Sometimes a collector from a foreign monastery comes to Lithuania
He came, and when he got to know the lords of the manor better,
He showed them the newspaper, torn from the scapular.
There was also a soldier's number written there,
And the name of each legion leader,
And each of them has a description of victory or death.
After many years, the family had its first
News of the life, glory and death of a son;
He took the house into mourning, but he didn't dare say
Who they were mourning for was anyone's guess.
In the area; and only the gentlemen's silent sadness,
Or Quiet Joy, was the newspaper of the landed gentry . 
Robak was supposedly such a secret collector:
He often spoke to the Judge separately;
After these conversations there is always some news
It spread in the neighborhood. The figure of the Saint Bernard
It seemed that this monk was not always in a hood
He walked and did not grow old in the monastery walls.
It was above the right ear, a little above the temple,
A scar, cut out of skin the width of a hand,
And in his beard there was a recent trace of a lance or gunshot;
He probably did not receive these wounds while reading the missal.
But not only the menacing look and scars,
But the movement itself and his voice had something soldierly about them.
During mass, when he addressed the people with raised hands
From the altar to the people to say: "The Lord be with you",
He often turned so skillfully at one go,
As if he was doing the right thing in the back as the leader ordered,
And he uttered the words of the liturgy in this tone
To the people, like an officer standing in front of his squadron:
The boys who served him at mass noticed this. 
Robak was also aware of political issues,
Than the lives of the saints; and going around collecting,
He often wondered in the district town.
He had a lot of business: he received letters,
Which he never opened in front of strangers,
He sent messengers, but where and why?
He didn't say anything; he often sneaked out at night
To the lords' courts, with the nobility he constantly whispered,
And he trampled down the surrounding villages,
And in the taverns he talked quite a lot with the peasants,
And always about what was happening in foreign countries.
Now the Judge, who had already been asleep for an hour,
He comes to wake you up; he probably has some news.